






































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning


Ho Law 
The Psychology 
of  Coaching, 
Mentoring and
Learning 
Second Edition 

ISBN 978-1-119-95466-8

T
h

e P
sych

ology of  C
oach

in
g, M

en
torin

g an
d

 L
earn

in
g

L
aw

 
Secon

d 
E

dition
 

“Learning is a pivotal theory of the book. Mentoring and coaching can be viewed as a collaborative 
project for both parts. The narrative approach to mentoring and coaching unfolded by Law can 
be seen as one of the foundations to create this dialogical space.” 

Professor Reinhard Stelter, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

“In a signifi cant and necessary way, The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning adds to 
the process of professionalizing coaching. It brings together a considerable body of psychological 
theory and research in the area of adult development. This is an excellent reference book for 
anyone who facilitates the development of others.”

Hugh O’Donovan, Programme Director, Masters in Coaching Psychology, School of Applied 
Psychology, University College, Cork

“I have known Ho for over a decade, as co-founders with fourteen peers of Coaching Psychology 
in the UK. His work is, as ever, a pleasure to read. It is evidence-based and arises out of a deep and 
ongoing desire to integrate the head and heart in the continuously evolving fi elds of coaching, 
mentoring and learning.”

Margaret A. Chapman, Chartered & Registered Psychologist, Coach, Mentor, Researcher & Author

“Ho Law’s book is an invaluable contribution to our emerging profession – relevant, robust and 
timely. Equally, this book is easily assessable, as it is written in a clear and concise way, blending in 
the latest in evidence-based practice, alongside the practical application of coaching, mentoring 
and learning… Every page is full of rich insight, which will make you think about your practice today.”

Katherine Tulpa, Global CEO, Association for Coaching

The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning addresses the psychological principles upon 
which coaching and mentoring are based and integrates them in a universal framework for the 
theory and practice of individual and organizational development. The second edition is updated 
with the latest research and takes into account the increasing importance of positive psychology 
and its role in coaching and mentoring, placing an emphasis on strength, growth and development.

Combining high-level theory with practical applications and case studies, this is an invaluable 
resource for coaches, mentors, trainers, psychologists, executives, managers and students.

Ho Law is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Psychology at the University of East London, UK. He 
is a founding Director of the International Society for Coaching Psychology, a founding member 
and past Chair of the BPS Special Group in Coaching Psychology, and a Registered Supervisor for 
chartership in occupational psychology. Together with colleagues Sara Ireland and Zulfi  Hussain, 
he has developed the Universal Integrative Framework (UIF) for coaching, mentoring and learning, 
which has been revised and developed through international application and franchising. He 
further developed narrative coaching in the UK and the wider communities. He is the founder and 
Director of Empsy Ltd, a service business providing coaching, consulting and training in the fi eld of 
empowerment psychology.

The Psychology of  Coaching, 
Mentoring and Learning Second Edition 


PS0001
File Attachment
9781119954668.jpg





The Psychology of Coaching,  
Mentoring and Learning





The Psychology of Coaching, 
Mentoring and Learning

SeCond ediTion

Ho Law



This edition first published 2013
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd

First edition published 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd

Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientific, 
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.

Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, Po19 8SQ, UK

Editorial Offices
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, oxford, oX4 2dQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, Po19 8SQ, UK

For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how  
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at  
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.

The right of Ho Law to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the 
UK Copyright, designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission 
of the publisher.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic books.

designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book.

Limit of Liability/disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. it is sold on the understanding that the publisher is 
not engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable 
for damages arising herefrom. if professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services  
of a competent professional should be sought.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Law, Ho.
 The psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning / Ho Law. – Second edition.
  pages cm
 includes bibliographical references and index.
 iSBn 978-1-119-95466-8 (pbk.)
1. Personal coaching. 2. executive coaching. 3. Mentoring. 4. Learning, Psychology of. i. Title. 
 BF637.P36L4 2014
 158.3–dc22

2013012020

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Cover image: Ladder to the sun © Mehmet Salih Guler / Getty images
Cover design by Richard Boxall design Associates

Set in 10/12.5pt Galliard by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, india

1 2013



Contents

About the Author vii
Foreword to the First edition by Stephen Palmer ix
Preface to the Second edition xiii
Acknowledgements xvii

   1 introduction 1

   2  The Coming of Age: Coaching Psychology,  
Coaching and Mentoring 9

   3  Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching  
and Mentoring: Positive Psychology and the Learning Process 23

   4  definitions: Coaching Psychology, Coaching,  
Mentoring and Learning 53

   5  Leadership and organizational Coaching and Mentoring:  
Becoming a Learning organization and Learning Community 63

   6  developing a Universal integrative Framework  
for Coaching and Mentoring 91

   7 Techniques and Tools 119

   8  Continuing Professional development, Learning Resources  
and Practical exercises 153

   9 Case Studies 175

10 evaluation 203

11 Conclusion, discussion, Future Research and development 219

References 237
index 253





About the Author

dr Ho Law is an international consultant and practitioner psychologist, Health and 
Care Professions Council (HCPC) registered occupational psychologist, Associate 
Fellow of the British Psychological Society (BPS), Fellow of the Chartered 
Management institute (Chartered Manager), Fellow of the Higher education 
Academy, Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and BPS Registered Coaching 
Psychologist, Chartered Scientist, Chartered Psychologist, and Registered Applied 
Psychology Practice Supervisor. Ho has had over 25 years of experience in psychology 
and management consultancy. He has delivered numerous workshops and conference 
 seminars, and carried out consultancy work in the UK and abroad (both in the east 
and in the West). Ho values diversity in people, respects their cultures, and believes in 
equal opportunities for all. He was one of the first equality advisers to the Assistant 
Permanent Undersecretary of State in the Home office; he was also the deputy Chair 
of the BPS Standing Committee for Promotion of equal opportunities. Ho is pas-
sionate about helping people to develop their talents and achieve their full potential 
through coaching and mentoring. Ho is a founding member and the former Chair of 
the BPS Special Group in Coaching Psychology; he is also founding director and trea-
surer of the international Society for Coaching Psychology. He has published over 40 
papers and received numerous  outstanding achievement awards, such as the Local 
Promoters for Cultural diversity Project in 2003; the Positive image (Business 
Category) in 2004; and Management essentials Participating Company in 2005. He 
was also winner of the first Student Led Teaching Award (2013) – Best Supervisor. 
He is the Head of Profession in Coaching Psychology, the founding director of 
empsy® Ltd and the president of empsy® network for coaching (www.empsy.com). 
At the University of east London School of Psychology, Ho is a Senior Lecturer, 
Co-Programme Leader in the MSc Coaching Psychology programme, Admissions 
Tutor, and Leader Tutor in the distance-learning programme (http://www.uel.ac.uk/
programmes/psychology/ postgraduate/coachingpsychology-dl.htm). Ho is currently 
supervising two part-time students’ Phds at the University of east London, and the 
students are working in the United Arab emirates.

http://www.empsy.com
http://www.uel.ac.uk/programmes/psychology/postgraduate/coachingpsychology-dl.htm
http://www.uel.ac.uk/programmes/psychology/postgraduate/coachingpsychology-dl.htm




Foreword to the First edition
Stephen Palmer

The psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning is an exciting and rapidly 
expanding area. However, psychology’s contribution to particular fields is often over-
looked; and the field of coaching and mentoring is no exception. For example, many 
coaching courses teach students how to coach by using a basic model or structure on 
how to hold a conversation with a client. one example is the GRoW model, the 
name of which is a useful acronym standing for Growth, Reality, options and Will 
(or wrap-up). in addition, courses usually include a range of listening and communi-
cation skills. Yet the whole programme is often taught within a psychological vacuum, 
as little or no psychological theory or research is covered that underpins coaching 
practice. We could conclude that most coaching practice is belief-based. Brent Rushall 
at San diego State University describes belief-based coaching as

a common and traditional form of coaching. its guides for practices are usually a mix of 
personal experiences, some limited education about sport sciences, selected incomplete 
knowledge of current coaching practices, and self-belief in that how coaching is conduc-
ted is right. Changes in coaching practices occur through self-selection of activities. The 
accumulated knowledge of belief-based coaching is subjective, biased, unstructured, and 
mostly lacking in accountability. Belief-based coaching also includes pseudo-scientific 
coaching. Pseudo-scientists attempt to give the impression of scientific knowledge but 
invariably their knowledge is incomplete resulting in false/erroneous postulations. 
 Belief-based coaching is normally the foundation of most coaching development schemes. 
organizations are closed (isolated) systems resisting intrusions of contrary evidence that 
might alter the constancy of the beliefs and social structure. Logical (knowledge) entropy 
increases with time in these structures. (Rushall, 2003: 1)

This excellent description of belief-based coaching highlights how often practitioners 
do not necessarily underpin their practice with psychological theory and academic 
research. is there an alternative? Fortunately there is. in academic institutions and 
within coaching-related professional bodies there is a gradual trend towards evidence-
based practice. Rushall (2003) describes evidence-based coaching as



x Foreword to the First Edition

a restricted and relatively rare form of coaching. its guides for practices are principles 
derived from replicated reputable studies reported by authoritative sources in a public 
manner. often there is consideration of objective studies that do and do not support 
 principles. evidence-based coaches have fewer guides for practices, but what are included 
are highly predictive for accomplishing particular training effects. The accumulated 
knowledge of evidence-based coaching is objectively verified and structured. However, 
evidence-based coaching principles are developed in a fragmented scientific world. it could 
be somewhat difficult to gather all the relevant knowledge into an educational scheme. 
organizations are open systems structured to constantly accept new knowledge and 
 concepts. Logical (knowledge) entropy decreases markedly as order is established. 
(Rushall, 2003: 1)

Applying evidence-based practice is the challenge facing the profession of coaching 
and mentoring, as we need more research to inform our practice. However, in recent 
years, with the launch of relevant coaching, coaching psychology and mentoring 
academic and practitioner journals, researchers and psychologists are in a better 
 position to publish their research findings. These journals include the International 
Coaching Psychology Review, The Coaching Psychologist, and the International Journal 
of Evidence Based Coaching and Mentoring. What has been noticeable is the gradual 
increase in the number of published papers showing the effectiveness of using 
 solution-focused and cognitive behavioural coaching approaches with non-clinical 
populations. There are plenty of published research papers highlighting how effective 
these approaches are with clinical populations; but the real challenge has been to 
prove that they are effective with non-clinical populations.

But, of course, it could all be down to the coaching relationship, and not to the 
approach to coaching. This has been the argument we have heard so often in the 
field of psychotherapy. Grbcic and Palmer (2006) decided in a research study to 
dispense with the coach (or therapist) and just test the cognitive–behavioural 
 methodology on managers by using a manualized, self-coaching approach to 
stress management and prevention at work. did it work? if it was largely down 
to  the practitioner–client  relationship, then it should not have worked! in this 
randomized controlled trial,  statistically significant results were obtained indi-
cating intervention effectiveness regardless of the frequency of work stressors and 
lack of organizational support remaining unchanged. The control group remained 
the same, unlike the self- coaching group, which showed measurable improve-
ment. Hence, in a short period of time, of about six years, researchers are already 
making substantial progress and building up data that can make a positive impact 
upon evidence-based practice.

it should not come as much of a surprise to learn that recent surveys have found 
that the most popular approaches being practised by UK-based coaching psycholo-
gists are the facilitation, solution-focused and cognitive–behavioural approaches 
(Whybrow and Palmer, 2006). This is relevant as the meteoric rise in popularity of 
coaching psychology in the UK has led to more research being undertaken by post-
graduate students on university courses or doctorate programmes. This exciting 
development parallels the creation of the Coaching Psychology Forum in 2002 and 
the subsequent launch of the British Psychological Society Special Group in Coaching 
Psychology in 2004. dr Ho Law was one of the key figures in the setting up of both 
groups.



 Foreword to the First Edition xi

Unlike this book, the early literature on the psychology of coaching and on  coaching 
psychology focused on the psychology of sports coaching (e.g. Griffith, 1926; Lawther, 
1951; Gaylord, 1967; Tutko and Richards, 1971; Wilt and Bosen, 1971; Llewellyn 
and Blucker, 1982). This book adds to evidence-based practice by  attempting to unify 
psychological theories that underpin coaching, mentoring and learning. The core 
element of the book is based on three years of research and development in the psy-
chology of coaching, mentoring and learning. The research and practice provided a 
foundation to develop a universal integrated framework that should be applicable 
across cultures. This book is a welcome addition to the literature and will inform the 
fields of mentoring, evidence-based coaching and coaching psychology.

References

Gaylord, C. (1967). Modern coaching psychology. iowa: W. M. C. Brown Book Company.
Grbcic, S. & Palmer, S. (2006). A cognitive–behavioural self-help approach to stress 

management and prevention at work: A randomized controlled trial. Conference 
paper presented on 24 november 2006 at the Joint Association for Rational emotive 
 Behaviour Therapy and the Association for Multimodal Psychology national Conference 
in  London, UK.

Griffith, C. R. (1926). Psychology of coaching: A study of coaching methods from the point of view 
of psychology. new York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Lawther, J. d. (1951). Psychology of coaching. englewood Cliffs, nJ: Prentice Hall.
Llewellyn, J. H. & Blucker, J. A. (1982). Psychology of coaching: Theory and application. 

 Minneapolis, Mn: Burgess Publishing Company.
Rushall, B. S. (2003). Coaching development and the second law of thermodynamics [or 

 belief-based versus evidence-based coaching development]. downloaded on 8/11/06 
from http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/dept/coachsci/csa/thermo/thermo.htm

Tutko, T. A. & Richards, J. W. (1971). Psychology of coaching. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Whybrow, A. & Palmer, S. (2006). Shifting perspectives: one year into the development of 

the British Psychological Society Special Group in Psychology in the UK. International 
Coaching Psychology Review, 1.2, 75–85.

Wilt, F. & Bosen, K. (1971). Motivation and coaching psychology. Los Altos, CA: Tafnews Press.

http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/dept/coachsci/csa/thermo/thermo.htm




Preface to the Second edition

The engagement in coaching, mentoring and learning is part of life itself. Like life, 
it continuously evolves and changes. Since the publication of the first edition of this 
book, a lot has happened in the coaching psychology world. For instance, from 1 July 
2009, professionals who are practising psychology in the UK are required by law to 
register with the Health Professions Council (now Health and Care Professions 
Council) as practitioner psychologists. While at present coaching and mentoring 
remain unregulated, the debate on their standards and practices continues. The first 
edition of this book reported the development of the British Psychological Society’s 
(BPS) Special Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP), which was formed in 2004; 
in 2012 the BPS set up a Register of Coaching Psychologists, in acknowledgement 
and recognition of those practitioner psychologists who have specialist expertise in 
 coaching psychology.

i was saddened to learn the tragic news that Michael White, my teacher in narrative 
therapy, died from a heart attack on 4 April 2008 in San diego, aged 59. We last met 
only a few months before, at the narrative Conference in norway, where we discussed 
with enthusiasm (as always) how we could transport narrative practice into reinvigorat-
ing other people’s lives, hopes and dreams. i hope the second edition of this book 
serves to honour Michael’s contributions to people’s lived stories, including mine.

As for the three authors of the first edition, our lives have changed too. Since the 
publication of the first edition, we have gone our separate ways. Sara ireland left her 
job in the healthcare sector and furthered her professional development. Zulfi Hussain 
continues to develop his other business engagements. Both Sara and Zulfi resigned 
from their positions as directors at Morph Group Limited in 2008. The company 
remained dormant for a few years and eventually was dissolved on 3 April 2012. in 
2009 i became Senior Lecturer at the University of east London (UeL), helping to 
lead its coaching psychology programme. i have been dividing my time between my 
academic engagements and business consultancy ever since.

in this edition i have continuously advocated a vigorous scientific approach towards 
coaching and mentoring processes, their theories and practices. This demands an evi-
dence-based evaluation, taking into account the output and outcome as well as the 
stakeholders’ experience of the coaching intervention. The concept of a ‘journey’ is 



xiv Preface to the Second Edition

used as a metaphor for coaching and mentoring. For many of us, it is a journey of 
discovery and rediscovery, one full of surprises. Most of all, the journey has been 
punctuated with magical moments in coaching and mentoring engagements, as in 
life. i continue to take pleasure in sharing some of these surprises and experiences in 
writing this book, which started another journey of its own.

The ‘writing journey’ was punctuated by the loss of my father, who passed away in 
Hong Kong on 9 May in 2012. i had to travel to and fro between the UK and Hong 
Kong and i was particularly touched by all the support i received during this period. My 
colleagues at UeL from both the BSc and the MSc programme teams stepped in at 
short notice to do the necessary student supervision, marking, and double-marking of 
the assignments, within a very tight schedule; their support has made me feel part of the 
team and of the community in which i feel blessed. There is a Chinese proverb saying 
that it is easy to add icing on the cake, but it is difficult to give support to someone in 
destitution. it is the times of hardship that test true collegiality, fellow-feeling and 
friendship. i thank my colleagues for making such great teams.

My father went through a proper traditional Chinese funeral. The ritual and its 
 procedures were quite novel to me (as i have been out of touch with my own culture 
for so long). They offered me and other members of my family, especially my mother, 
a scaffolding for grieving. My father, aged 96, had witnessed a lot of changes during 
the wars and cultural revolution in China before he moved to Hong Kong. on reflec-
tion, though, he enjoyed a long and happy life, especially in his later years, seeing all 
six of his children grow up and achieve their aspirations – and starting to see the same 
in the grandchildren. He left no unfinished business. So, in his case, the funeral was 
truly a celebration of the completion of his life, even though sometimes there is still a 
kind of strange, lingering sense of loss…

My father’s middle and first names are Kai Sin; they mean ‘showing’ and ‘kindness’. 
These words resonate with the spirit of coaching and mentoring. i shall hold onto this 
spirit, keep it dearly in my heart and attempt to manifest unconditional kindness in 
everything i do.

in all my engagements i have continued to be active in teaching, learning, research 
and development – all in coaching psychology. The preparation of this second edition 
reflects my ongoing commitment to the development of coaching psychology as a dis-
cipline. And i keep my conviction that coaching psychology is a scientific discipline, yet 
there is a magic to its art.

Following the same structure as the first edition, this edition contains the essence 
of that book. While both Sara and Zufi contributed to the development of the initial 
universal integrated framework (UiF), i have further refined the framework through 
ongoing research and development. Thus i have taken care to update all the chapters 
and to ensure that they remain current, coherent, and consistent as a whole. The key 
additions are:

•  the results of the Global Coaching Survey commissioned by the international 
Coach Federation (iCF) and the latest discussion on the Coming of Age: Coaching 
Psychology (Chapter 2);

•  updated literature on learning theories, including social learning theories and 
 narrative practices (Chapter 3);



 Preface to the Second Edition xv

•  recent business case studies and the agile coaching approach in developing a 
learning organization (Chapter 5);

•  an updated UiF model, including systems approach and alternative representa-
tions of the model across cultures (Chapter 6);

•  new case studies in coaching and mentoring (Chapter 9);
•  an up-to-date discussion on coaching and mentoring, their standards and their 

 supervision (Chapter 11).

The online tool that was developed in the first edition is now further refined to measure 
an individual’s cultural and social competence (CSC) as a self-assessment questionnaire 
(SAQ). This is now available at http://www.uelpsychology.org/csc/ and readers can 
contact me to gain access to using the tool.

So, whatever your interest in the process of coaching or mentoring, i hope this 
book takes another step forward in widening your access to its practice through the 
psychology of learning. For aspiring individuals everywhere who have experienced the 
benefits of coaching or mentoring directly, i hope that you might feel just a little 
closer to understanding some of the theories behind how this process works. And for 
those still looking in from the outside, i hope the approach presented in this book 
encourages you to get involved.

There is a time for everything,
and a season for every activity under the heavens:
a time to be born and a time to die,
a time to plant and a time to uproot.

(ecclesiastes 3: 1–2)

now it’s time to learn and to get involved in coaching and mentoring…

http://www.uelpsychology.org/csc/




Acknowledgements

As happened in the first edition, there are, inevitably, many names to  acknowledge, 
including those of family members and friends, who have been taken for granted 
while this book was being written; and there are also many unintentional  omissions. 
So, without mentioning every possible individual, i shall list some of those 
who  have continued to inspire me as well as some of the contributors – the 
unsung heroes and organizations within the context of my journey of preparing 
this edition.

Thanks go to:

•  dr Carla Gibbes, Senior Lecturer at the University of east London, for her 
 kindness and support;

•  Liz Hall, for communicating the concept of narrative coaching to wider 
professional communities via Coaching at Work;

•  Trevor Hall, oBe, CBe, who has continued to inspire me in championing equality 
and diversity in my cross-cultural journey, in my career, and in life;

•  Professor Stephen Palmer, for his continuous support and for updating the 
Foreword;

•  Kaemorine Prendergast, for her kindness and righteousness in championing 
equality;

•  Aquilina Reginald, my former coaching student, for helping me to introduce 
coaching to nursing and for contributing to the case study on leadership coaching 
in the healthcare sector in Malta;

•  dr donald Ridley, principal lecturer at the University of east London, for his 
support and guidance;

•  Christine Stocker-Gibson, for contributing to the case study on Community 
Coaching Cafẻ;

•  Michael White, dulwich Centre, who inspired and trained me in narrative 
approaches from down under: his spirit will continue to manifest itself in my 
 narrative coaching.



xviii Acknowledgements

organizations that have provided me with support and information for this edition are:

•  the Association for Coaching;
•  the British Psychological Society’s (BPS) Special Group in Coaching Psychology;
•  the Chartered Management institute (CMi);
•  the european Mentoring and Coaching Council (eMCC);
•  the international Coach Federation (iCF) – which gave me permission to publish 

the results of its Global Coaching Study (iCF and PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012)
•  the international Society for Coaching Psychology.

Most of all, i would like to thank all those whom i came across in my coaching 
or  mentoring journey, in many spaces and places, starting with the place where 
i live: people in Peterborough and the neighbouring areas within Cambridgeshire. it 
was here that a number of coaching and mentoring programmes took place – for 
 communities, for individuals, for private and public organizations. it was here that 
some of the case studies have been consolidated. it was here that the universal 
integrated framework was developed, through our lived experience.

And from the place where i work, in particular, i would like to thank all my col-
leagues in the School of Psychology, University of east London, where the 2012 
London olympics and Paralympics took place. The place truly embodies the spirit of 
the games, which is to inspire individuals to achieve their highest potential; for this is 
the spirit of coaching and mentoring too!

There are many more of you out there who have contributed to my understanding. 
To you, perhaps the unacknowledged, i offer my thanks.

Ho Law
Peterborough, england

Disclaimers

The views expressed in this book are those of the author, and not those of the 
 publisher, or empsy Ltd, or UeL or anyone else. This is in no way affected by the 
right reserved by the author to edit the cases published. owing to the requirement for 
confidentiality within our code of ethics, the context and stories of some case studies 
may have been adapted and individual identities kept anonymous. if the case studies 
 documented in this book have omitted any partners’ contributions, this is entirely 
unintentional.

Any constructive comments and suggestions for future editions of this book are 
welcome. Please write to:

Ho Law Phd CPsychol CSci CMgr MiSCP(Accred) AFBPsS FCMi FHeA
Po Box 696
Peterborough Pe2 9YQ
england, UK
email:
Personal: ho.law@ntlworld.com
Company: ho.law@empsy.com
http://www.empsy.com/

http://www.empsy.com/


 Acknowledgements xix

Twitter: @empsy
www.twitter.com/empsy
University: law2@uel.ac.uk
http://www.uel.ac.uk/psychology/staff/hochunglaw/
internet: drholaw@gmail.com
Ho Law

http://www.twitter.com/empsy
http://www.uel.ac.uk/psychology/staff/hochunglaw/




The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

introduction

This book is about the psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning. There are 
many books about learning and mentoring; there are even more about coaching. 
However, there are very few books that bring together these important, diverse and 
growing fields, making them intersect. The title of the book reflects the value i place 
on diversity in the emerging discipline of coaching and how the latter can be enriched 
by being continuously expanded so as to include mentoring, while it remains grounded 
in the solid foundation of the psychology of learning.

Aims

The aim of this chapter is to help readers gain a rapid understanding of the nature of 
the book and find easily the information it offers. it provides a rationale for the book, 
together with a résumé of its overall structure and a brief description of each chapter. 
it also suggests how readers working at different levels can use the book to make it 
meet their interests, experience and professional competence.

Whom Is It For?

The purpose of this book is to show how individuals and organizations can apply the 
theories and principles of psychology in coaching, mentoring and learning. To this 
end, the book is written for the following groups:

•  coaches, mentors and trainers who would like to learn the general theories and 
principles of psychology that underpin coaching, mentoring and learning;

•  psychologists who want to apply their experience to the coaching, mentoring and 
training of individuals and organizations;

1



2 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  senior executives and managers responsible for the use of training budgets, who 
would like to realize their potential benefit and understand how to design and 
evaluate effective training programmes for their organizations;

•  students of psychology who would like to consider their future career in coaching, 
mentoring and training.

i am aware that the emerging field of coaching and mentoring, coupled with the 
popularity of psychology in the UK, will attract a very wide readership. Thus my 
intended readership is not limited to the categories described above. Readers may 
well include teachers, instructors and anyone involved in coaching, mentoring, 
training or supervision.

With the rapid development of coaching and mentoring as an industry, much 
 confusion exists between the psychology of coaching and mentoring and the 
 psychology of counselling and psychotherapy. in comparison to the development of 
psychotherapy as a discipline, we have found in our disciplines a lot more sharing of 
practices, which has been promoted by various coaching and mentoring organizations 
(see Chapter 2).

How This Book Differs from Others

There are many books on coaching and mentoring in the market. However, this book 
differs from others in the following aspects:

•  As far as i am aware, in its first edition, this has been the first book in the UK to 
attempt to bring together the psychological theory that underpins coaching, 
 mentoring and learning. it embodies a number of developments in coaching and 
mentoring, as well as in coaching psychology. it traces the development of the 
Special Group in Coaching Psychology within the British Psychological Society, 
which addresses coaching psychology as a discipline.

•  it reflects the latest thinking, research and development in coaching psychology 
through high-level theories, principles and practical applications. This second 
edition ensures that the research and development are up to date.

•  it applies psychology to both coaching/mentoring and learning, thereby blurring 
the boundaries between these disciplines and yet addressing the differences bet-
ween them.

•  it contains cross-cultural elements that make the theories universal and applicable 
across different cultures.

•  it applies, to coaching and mentoring, the general psychology of learning rather 
than psychotherapy (Chapter 3).

•  it demonstrates the know-how and exercises with step-by-step instructions, as 
well as with case studies from diverse organizational and community contexts 
(Chapters 7–9).

•  it includes a chapter on evaluation that demonstrates the effectiveness of 
applying the psychology of learning to coaching, mentoring and learning 
(Chapter 10).



 Introduction 3

Working terminology

Before you get going, this section offers some pragmatic working definitions to those 
of you who have no knowledge of coaching, mentoring and learning. These defini-
tions will be further refined in Chapter 4. Broadly speaking, the book talks about 
processes and activities that support learning. in this context, ‘learning’ can be defined 
as a cognitive process of acquiring skill and knowledge. ‘Coaching’ is often described 
as a process of offering support to an individual; this process is performance-focused 
and goal-centred and it results in action. A ‘mentor’ – a term used in mentoring – is 
a critical friend who oversees the development of another. All these processes are 
learner-centred and learner-driven. A theme running throughout this book is the 
cross-cultural application of coaching and mentoring. ‘Culture’ is broadly defined as 
the predominant attitudes and behaviour that characterize the functioning of a group, 
community or organization; we typically apply it to a whole range of contexts: coun-
tries, ethnic categories, professions, workplaces. The term ‘cross-cultural’ refers to the 
interaction between people or entities from two or more cultures. Theories, concepts 
and techniques will be tested cross-culturally, so that we can see if they are transferable 
to other contexts and hence valid beyond the original application setting.

Towards the integration of terms

The material provided in this book represents the fertile ground of interaction 
between coaching, mentoring and psychology (in particular, learning). This triangular 
relationship can be represented in a simple Venn diagram (see Figure 1.1).

However, as the research and coaching or mentoring journey unfolded, one would 
discover that there are actually increasing overlaps between the three disciplines. Thus 
one could see the three circles of influence in Figure 1.1 gravitating towards each 
other (see Figure 1.2). The next question then becomes clear: How much overlap is 
there between the three disciplines in practice?

The three are in fact interwoven. Chapter 2 shows that coaching and mentoring are 
coming of age. it considers market forces, the development of the coaching/mentoring 

Coaching 

Psychology of
learning

Mentoring

Figure 1.1 The ground of fertile overlap between coaching, mentoring and the psychology 
of learning



4 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

industry and the global market place, and their roles in shaping practice. in order to 
bring the model of coaching/mentoring and psychology of learning to life, the orien-
tation of this book can be rearranged as a three-dimensional (3d) working model (see 
Figure 1.3).

in this model, coaching and mentoring are viewed as an interchangeable con-
tinuum. Sometimes they may even be regarded as the same thing, depending on 
the context. For simplicity, the terms coaching, coach and coachee are used to 

Coaching 

Psychology of
learning

Mentoring

Coaching 
psychology

Figure 1.2 increasing the area of overlap between coaching, mentoring and the psychology 
of learning

Coaching/mentoring

Psychology of 
learning

Age

Disability

Faith
Sexual  

orientation
Gender

Race

Diversity in 
coaching/mentoring

Figure 1.3 Working with a 3d model of coaching, mentoring and psychology of learning



 Introduction 5

mean coaching/mentoring, coaches/mentors and coachees/mentees respectively 
(unless their specific meaning is stated explicitly). Whatever the context, due regard 
should be given to the diversity of all participants in this process. This understanding 
extends to their appreciation of sensitivities and of the respect that each one should 
have for the others’ values, beliefs, faith, gender, sexual orientation, social barriers, 
disability, and racial and cultural backgrounds. To understand the universality and 
diversity of coachees within a diverse setting, it is important that coaches learn more 
about the principles and techniques grounded in the psychology of learning and 
applicable across cultures.

Content in a Nutshell

Coaching and mentoring are different disciplines. organizations and groups have 
been set up specializing in coaching and/or mentoring. These include the Association 
for Coaching, the British Psychological Society’s Special Group in Coaching 
Psychology, the european Mentoring and Coaching Council, and the international 
Coaching Federation (see Chapter 2). Coaches and mentors come from diverse back-
grounds. While you may not need a degree in psychology in order to be a coach and 
a mentor, for coaching and mentoring to be effective, you need to understand the 
psychological principles on which the practice is based. Without this understanding, 
coaches and mentors risk not achieving their intended outcome.

drawing on the comprehensive literature in the psychology of learning, this book 
focuses on linking theory to practical application. The core principles of positive 
psychology and learning are described in Chapter 3. The same chapter provides a 
literature review as well as highlighting the philosophy of positive psychology and 
the learning theories that are useful in coaching and mentoring practice within the 
tradition of epistemology. (When we refer to epistemology, we mean to question 
the nature of what we know: fundamentally, epistemology asks what knowledge is 
and how we distinguish it from our internal thoughts and beliefs.) Chapter 4 
addresses key definitions of coaching, mentoring and learning, which are grounded 
in the psychology of learning from the previous chapter. once we revised the 
 psychology of learning and established our own key definitions within the intersect-
ing domains of coaching, mentoring and learning, we set out here on a journey of 
enquiry, and we proceed logically to guide the reader through the chapters that 
follow. Chapter 5 describes how coaching and mentoring can be used as a vehicle 
to  help organizations become learning organizations. From the consolidation of 
theory into coaching and mentoring practice in diverse settings, a universal 
integrated framework (UiF) is developed; and its revised version, the integrative 
learning system (iLS), is described in Chapter 6. The major classes of techniques 
and tools are described in Chapter 7. Chapter 8 supplements them with relevant 
practical exercises; i hope readers will find them useful. Chapter 9 provides a 
number  of case studies in terms of the UiF and a reflective learning process to 
 demonstrate that these theories and exercises work in the real world, in various 
organizations as well as in diverse communities. one of the major criticisms of the 
emerging coaching industry is that most theories and practices lack rigorous, evi-
dence-based evaluation. Chapter 10 meets this challenge by providing an impact 



6 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

evaluation of the UiF linked to a case study. Finally, Chapter 11 describes perceived 
future directions and work by incorporating the following key themes:

•  matching between coaching/mentoring pairs;
•  coordinator role;
•  emotional intelligence cross-cultural competency;
•  evidence-based research and impact assessment;
•  supervision;
•  training;
•  coaching/mentoring standards, codes of conduct and ethics.

Book Research Approach

Writing this book has been like riding two horses. i would like to ensure that it 
is  easy to read and accessible to a diverse readership without compromising its 
academic rigour. Thus, wherever possible, the writing style is straightforward. 
Academic  references are only noted at specific points in the text. They reflect the 
wide range of literature reviewed from online sources and the information obtained 
by attending international workshops and conferences – in the UK, europe, Australia 
and Hong Kong. While the literature review casts the research net very widely, 
it  also focuses on the deliverables that this book represents  – that is, on useful 
guidance for learners and practitioners in the field of coaching psychology, coach-
ing, mentoring and training. Although the UiF developed here is grounded both in 
established psychological theories of learning and in evidence-based evaluation 
for its effectiveness and efficacy, it has been continually refined and revised for this 
new edition.

Why Coaching, Mentoring and Learning?

As globalization leads to more intense competition, organizations need to continue to 
recruit, develop and deploy the best people in order to stay ahead and survive. We 
have seen rapid and unprecedented change in our organizations and communities 
across the globe. This has taken place in the fast-growing communications industry as 
well as in public organizations. Repeated reconfigurations in search of service improve-
ments have meant that leaders are required to work at the furthest bounds of their 
capability. Corporate leaders have begun to realize that traditional training methods 
may not be able to cope with the pace of change. Hence organizations have turned to 
coaching and mentoring to help develop their people, to deepen their talent pool 
and  to enhance their organizational learning capability. Mentoring and coaching 
go beyond industry. individuals from vulnerable communities need to be channelled 
to effective routes, towards learning in trusted partnerships; isolated groups need a 
mechanism for breaking down barriers and reaching out to mainstream communities; 
and any people who want to learn more about themselves, or increase their knowledge 
in targeted areas and in the wider environment, can benefit.



 Introduction 7

How to read this book

owing to the philosophy that underpins this book, the following terms are used 
 interchangeably throughout this book:

•  you and readers;
•  coaches and mentors;
•  coachees and mentees;
•  learners, trainers and supervisors.

each chapter is intended to be independent in terms of its topic and content. You may 
pick and choose which chapters are relevant to you. nevertheless, throughout this 
book you will find that the chapters are interwoven, and some are clustered more 
closely around a topic than others at a certain juncture in the coaching journey. it is 
recommended that the chapters be read consecutively in pairs. For example, if you are 
a learner or a student who would like to know more about coaching and mentoring 
and about how they link to the psychology of learning, you should read Chapters 2 
and 3. if you are a busy chief executive or a training manager who wants to find out 
about the relevance of coaching and mentoring to organizations, you may like to 
read Chapter 5. For experienced coaches and mentors wishing to refer directly to the 
techniques and exercises, Chapters 7 and 8 can be read together. Chapter 8 provides 
a things-to-do list for coaching; in addition, the exercises are organized in a systematic 
way, so that readers can refer back to the principles described in Chapter 7. Whether 
you are a beginner or an experienced coach or mentor, you will find these two chap-
ters useful, as they provide pointers for you to begin your continuous professional 
development or to fine-tune what you already know. Readers who are interested in 
concrete examples, case studies and the evidence-based evaluation of coaching and 
mentoring programmes can go directly to Chapters 9 and 10. Throughout the book, 
each chapter highlights, through cross-referencing, concepts and ideas that are inter-
woven. in this way i hope that our ‘conversation’ will provide a sense of continuity as 
the story unfolds and will encourage a dramatic re-engagement with many of your 
experiences that may fill some of the gaps in this book. To help readers apply the the-
ories to reflective practice, each chapter is written to a standard format. it begins with 
an introduction designed to outline its content and ends with a chapter summary and 
reflection, which summarizes the key concepts and reflects on practical implications.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

The Coming of Age
Coaching Psychology, Coaching  

and Mentoring

Introduction

This chapter describes the developments in coaching psychology, coaching and 
mentoring. it provides an up-to-date review, drawn from various disciplines that 
underpin coaching psychology, coaching and mentoring. Through the discussion 
of the literature, it will trace the ‘journey’ of development in coaching psychology, 
coaching and mentoring. This journey will involve many disciplines: science, social 
science and various branches of psychology: educational, social, behavioural as 
well as business psychology; also sociology, business studies, management systems 
and economics. The chapter will then explain how coaching psychology, coach-
ing  and mentoring are interrelated. The discourse leads to the convergent 
integration of coaching and mentoring through learning, which provides a bridge 
between two emerging fields in psychology: positive psychology and community 
psychology.

The Coaching Psychology, Coaching, Mentoring  
and Training Market

The coaching, mentoring and training market has been in a state of flux. in 2004, 
when the first edition of this book was being written, our initial estimate of the average 
turnover of companies that would offer coaching was £8 million, with £500,000 pre-
tax profit. This figure was found to be conservative. As the coaching and mentoring 
industries continue to grow exponentially, the total turnover is now estimated to 
exceed many billions of dollars (on a global scale).

each month, in papers and coaching magazines, we have been bombarded with 
news about companies and organizations using coaching or mentoring to leverage 

2



10 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

their business performance. For example, the Medical Research Council applied 
coaching to develop its organizational strategy (Whiteley, 2006); the United Kingdom 
Atomic energy Authority (UKAeA) coached 130 employees in its leadership 
programme; Armagh College, northern ireland, developed a coaching culture by 
undertaking the Centre for excellence Learning’s ‘Leaders as Coaches’ programme; 
Greater Manchester Police has developed internal coaches to strengthen its leadership 
(Hall, 2006a). Mentoring has also enjoyed financial backing from business tycoons. 
For example, a £200 million mentor fund was set up in 2001 in West Coast Capital, 
Scotland, to invest in high-growth businesses across the UK. A survey of 109 coaches 
in 2004 showed that many practitioners offered more than one area of coaching. The 
majority of respondents were from business applications (over 60 per cent); others 
were from career, executive and leadership coaching (Palmer and Whybrow, 2004). 
For the past few years, coaching psychology took off around the world – six interna-
tional congresses were held, in London (UK), dublin (ireland), Barcelona (Spain), 
Stockholm (Sweden), Pretoria (South Africa) and Sydney (Australia).

in 2012, PricewaterhouseCoopers conducted an online survey commissioned by 
the international Coach Federation (iCF) as part of its Global Coaching Study. it 
received 12,133 responses from 117 countries. The results of the survey indicated 
that there were around 47,500 professional coaches worldwide. in other words, we 
had approximately 7 coaches per 1 million population. of these, 87 per cent (41,300 
coaches) were actively engaging clients, with an average annual revenue of $47,900. 
This generated a global income of $1,979 million in total. The majority of the 
coaching services were in consulting (62 per cent) and/or training (60 per cent). 
Most of the professional coaches (76 per cent) were in the high-income regions of 
the world: north America (33.2 per cent: 15,800), Western europe (37.5 per cent: 
17,800), Australia and new Zealand (5 per cent: 2,400). But the survey also showed 
that there was rapid growth in emerging economic regions, especially in Asia (7 per 
cent: 3,300), the Middle east and Africa (4.3 per cent: 2,100). despite the economic 
climate of the time, the majority of coaches – 55 per cent, and mostly in the emerg-
ing economic regions – reported an increase in income, compared with 15 per cent, 
who reported a decrease. As we can see from the iCF report, the coaching industry 
is in good health as a whole and professional coaches can look forward to the future 
with confidence.

Within both the private and the public sectors, there exists a diversity of services, 
ranging from technology to education, some suppliers operating within one business 
sector while others offer coaching and training across a wide spectrum. The majority 
of providers who specialize in coaching and mentoring are very small, employing no 
more than six people. despite its diversity, we attempt to categorize the industry into 
four types:

1 academic and professional institutions;
2 business and management consultancies;
3 independent practitioners;
4 internal coaches and mentors.

in what follows i shall expand on each type, discussing its scope and development.



 The Coming of Age 11

Academic and professional institutions

This category includes colleges of further education, institutions of higher education 
and business schools, as well as professional institutes such as the British Psychological 
Society (BPS), the institute of directors (iod), the Chartered Management institute 
(CMi) and the Chartered institute of Personnel and development (CiPd). For 
example, the BPS has a formal process of accrediting psychologists through its char-
tership. The CiPd has a membership of more than 120,000 and runs a wide range of 
training courses, including in coaching, the psychology of management, learning and 
development. Furthermore, participants on the courses have access to its web-based 
learner support site, which is designed to provide additional resources and to enhance 
and extend their learning.

The coaching and mentoring programmes in these organizations tends to be run by 
their in-house staff or members. Sometimes the academic and professional institutions 
also offer external training programmes and courses on coaching and mentoring. 
These may range from tailor-made short vocational courses to formal academic studies 
leading to a diploma, a master’s degree or a doctoral qualification.

Professional organizations for coaching psychology,  
coaching and mentoring

in recent years a number of professional organizations have been developing that spe-
cialize in coaching psychology, coaching and/or mentoring. Some are entirely new 
(new in the sense that they were founded less than 20 years ago). The relatively new 
organizations include:

•  the Association for Coaching (AC);
•  the Association for Professional executive Coaching and Supervision;
•  the european Mentoring and Coaching Council (eMCC);
•  the international Coach Federation (iCF);
•  the international Society for Coaching Psychology (iSCP).

even established professional organizations such as the BPS and the CMi have also 
developed new coaching or coaching  psychology subsystems within their organiza-
tions. These subsystems include:

•  the British Association for Counselling & Psychotherapy (BACP) Coaching division;
•  the BPS Special Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP);
•  the CMi Coaching division.

i shall describe some of this development in greater detail in the next sections.

BPS SGCP
The British Psychological Society (BPS) is a well-established professional society. 
it  was founded in 1901. in 2011 it celebrated its 110th anniversary through a 
number of initiatives aimed at promoting excellence and ethical practice in the sci-
ence, education and application of psychology. However, the Special Group in 



12 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Coaching Psychology (SGCP) is a relatively new development within the BPS. As 
this development is most relevant to the psychology of coaching, i shall describe its 
history briefly here.

on 18 May 2002, at the BPS division of Counselling Psychology (dCoP) Annual 
Conference in Torquay, a workshop about coaching psychology was convened by my 
colleague, Professor Stephen Palmer. it was attended by 29 members. initially Stephen 
intended to create a Coaching Psychology Special interest Group (SiG) within dCoP. 
However, at that time dCoP did not have a constitution that allowed the formation 
of a SiG (there was some politics underneath the process, but i will not go into the 
details here). As a way forward, an internet Coaching Psychology Forum was 
established. To promote the Forum and its membership, the first article for the intro-
duction of coaching psychology was published in The Occupational Psychologist – the 
bulletin of the division of occupational Psychology (Law, 2002). The article gener-
ated a surge in the membership, which accounts for the majority of membership in the 
Forum coming from the division of occupational Psychologists. This trend con-
tinues within the BPS SGCP. on 21 February 2003, a Coaching Psychology Forum 
meeting was held in London and a proposal was made to set up a Special Group 
within the BPS. Looking back, it was quite a long struggle with the organizational 
process and politics within the BPS structure to get the proposal through. To cut a 
long story short, the SGCP was finally formed, and on 15 december 2004 it held the 
inaugural meeting in London. Since then, the membership has continued to grow 
and consolidate. in 2011 SGCP had around 2,300 members, and it is the fourth larg-
est Member network within the BPS. Figure  2.1 provides a breakdown of the 
membership.

ISCP
The SGCP held the international Forum for Coaching Psychology on 18 december 
2006, at the 1st international Coaching Psychology Conference, which was held at 
City University, London. Twenty delegates from around the world discussed the 
possibility of creating an international Association, Society or Forum for Coaching 

Occupational 41%

Counselling 14%
Clinical 7%

Sports and Exercise 5%

Health 4%

Others 29%

Figure 2.1 The BPS SGCP membership in 2011



 The Coming of Age 13

Psychology. it was pointed out that there were at that time international associations 
for coaching, but none was specifically dedicated to the field of coaching psychology. 
There was a need for an international association or society with a remit to promote 
and develop coaching psychology around the world. in April 2008 the Society for 
Coaching Psychology was launched. The Society aimed to promote coaching psy-
chology around the world and to encourage the development of theory, research and 
practice in this field. on 18 July 2011 the Society was granted permission to change 
its name to that of international Society for Coaching Psychology (http://www.
isfcp.net/).

CMI
The CMi (the former British institute of Management) was founded in 1947 and 
awarded a Royal Charter in 2002. it is a mature professional body. The accreditation 
required the re-design of the module specifications that map onto the learning out-
come of its Qualifications and Curriculum Framework (QCF). This has already been 
done in the CPd (continuous professional development) module specifications for a 
short course award (CMi, 2012). Such a course would offer students more scope in 
terms of employability and credibility. it would provide an information centre for 
job opportunities. Recently the CMi incorporated the institute of Consulting. This 
move offers CMi members a diverse scope in terms of further development and 
employability.

Business and management consultancies

More and more business and management consultancies offer coaching services – as 
well as training for coaches – as part of an overall consultancy package or separately.

in general, business and management consultancies use coaching as part of personal 
and management development. Their aim is to help organizations to improve:

•  return on investment (Roi);
•  bottom-line profit;
•  human capital;
•  relationships;
•  conflict resolution;
•  work–life balance;
•  career development.

Independent practitioners
These include large companies as well as sole traders who offer coaching or mentoring 
as their main activity. There is a significantly large number of independent practitioners 
in coaching and mentoring. Their background ranges from training or personnel to 
business and management consultancy or marketing. in particular, many individuals 
who claim to be ‘a life coach’ tend to be sole traders who may or may not have 
another job to supplement their income. Although many sole traders often have a low 
profile, they do provide quite a competitive market, as their costs and fees are relatively 
low. The presence of such a large number of individual private coaches and mentors 
in an unregulated industry does pose concerns in terms of ethics and standards. These 
issues will be further discussed in Chapter 11.

http://www.isfcp.net/
http://www.isfcp.net/


14 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Internal coaches and mentors
internal coaches or mentors provide services similar to those of their employer’s staff. 
For example, a lot of colleges and universities have developed internal mentoring 
procedures: each new member of staff may have a mentor assigned to him or her, and 
the mentor may or may not be the mentee’s line manager. The issues arising from the 
debate whether the mentor should or should not be the mentee’s line manager will be 
discussed later. internal coaches or mentors are also competing in the market, as their 
professional rates tend to be much lower than those of the external consultants. They 
present distinct advantages in that they understand their clients and the context of the 
organization.

external and internal managers can be mentors and coaches. For good practice, it 
may be better to use external coaches or mentors, in order to ensure confidentiality 
and to give reassurance to those in more challenging and demanding positions. in a 
mixed economy of external and internal coaches and mentors, using managers this 
way offers an opportunity to share good practice within one framework.

To summarize, the above types of coaching and mentoring providers can be classi-
fied into the matrix in Table 2.1.

There are some overlaps between categories in the above matrix. For example, 
larger corporate companies and institutions may employ both internal coaches and 
 mentors and external consultants who operate as independent practitioners. Techno-
logy is another factor to add to the complexity of the above matrix. For example, 
online coaching and mentoring programmes and training packages may be available 
on the internet. These offer a significant amount of information and knowledge at a 
fraction of the cost. They can be stand-alone as well as tailor-made, so that they can 
be integrated into the internal corporate coaching and mentoring programme. For 
example, Chapter 9 presents a case study in applying an online tool in the coaching 
and mentoring programme within the national Health Service in the UK, and another 
in a transatlantic coaching pilot project between the Association for Coaching (UK) 
and Rice University in Houston (USA).

Coaching and mentoring play a big part in developing human potential and in 
improving performance both for individuals and for organizations. There is a variety 
of types of organizations as well as of styles of coaching and mentoring, ranging from 
a direct instructional approach to non-directive, facilitative techniques. Some of these 
techniques will be explored further in Chapter 7. in this book we do not intend to 
preach that there is a right way of coaching and mentoring, but we argue that, for 
coaching and mentoring to be effective and applicable across different contexts and 
cultures, they are to be grounded in the psychology of learning. The rest of this 
chapter provides a literature review relevant to this important area and explains how 
the psychology of learning interrelates with coaching and mentoring. As we shall see 

Table 2.1 Coaching and mentoring marketing matrix

Internal External

Corporate Academic and professional  
institutions
internal coaches and mentors

Business and management 
consultancies

Private Private arrangements independent practitioners



 The Coming of Age 15

later, the psychology of learning can be regarded as a starting point in understanding 
the coherent framework of the diverse practices in coaching and mentoring.

Coaching

From our observation, most people believe that coaching is beneficial for them and 
good for their business. out of 36 executives who received coaching in South Africa, 
97 per cent reported that coaching delivered return on investment (Roi) to their 
organization (Hall, 2006c). The perceived average benefit of Roi from 43 respon-
dents was reported to be 5.7 times the initial investment in the UK’s study (McGoven 
et al., 2001). Sue Holland reported that executive coaches from different parts of the 
world had found coaching to be useful in helping them to calibrate what was a cultural 
norm and what was individually unique at Unilever (Whiteley, 2006). Coaching 
enables people to create space to think and reflect upon their learning.

Mentoring

There is a lot of misunderstanding around the concept of mentoring. For example, 
with recent media coverage and the emerging development of various associations 
and groups dedicated to coaching and coaching psychology, many people thought 
the mentoring market was not as high-profile as coaching. This is apparently not so. 
Articles about mentoring stories are published by various magazines and journals. 
For example, one reads that, ‘from Tom Hunter to James dyson, British business 
tycoons are opening their minds to the next generation of entrepreneurs as mentor-
ing programmes flourish…’ – as was published by the institute of directors in 
its magazine Director for Business Leaders (Magee, 2006). There are a number of 
associations, new and established, which regard mentoring either as their core 
business or as part of the approaches embedded in their services: for example, eastern 
Mentoring Forum and the Prince’s Trust. The european Mentoring and Coaching 
Council, as the name suggests, regards both mentoring and coaching as its core 
organizational activities.

Another myth about mentoring is that it takes place only in the world of business 
and that mentors are usually more experienced persons who help their ‘protégées’ get 
up the corporate ladder. This is not necessarily the case. Many mentoring programmes 
are set up in public sectors, including educational institutions such as colleges and 
universities, as well as in large organizations, for instance the national Health Service 
(see Chapter 9 for our case studies).

in this book, as we have already explained, we use the metaphor of a journey. The 
context of coaching may be very different from that of mentoring – the former may 
be on improving the performance of an organization while the latter may be about 
one’s own career progression; yet coaching and mentoring are actually very close 
together. Viewed from this perspective, mentors appear as trusted guides, who under-
stand the theory of personal development and have had experience of translating 
it  into practice (see, for example, daloz, 1999). Mentors are not simply providing 
 mentees with a road map and travel tips, but also walk some of the journey together 



16 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

with them. The collaboration (co-journeying) enables both mentors and mentees to 
develop; and they experience a new journey that is full of surprises.

Coaching Psychology

Historically, coaching as used in sports was based on the psychology of sports and exer-
cises. This embraces both cognitive and behavioural psychology. Sir John Whitmore, 
former international racing driver, has followed this path of development in his coach-
ing career, and is now widely regarded as one of the pioneers of the coaching industry. 
As he said: ‘i think [the coaching] principles are universal and it will eventually be 
common in all aspects of life – such as parenting’ (quoted in Hilpern, 2006).

The above statement has two important implications. First, the nature of mentor-
ing is implicit in parenting. This reinforces our view on the interwoven relationship of 
coaching and mentoring. Second, and more importantly, the statement represents a 
widely held belief that there are common strands of psychological principles that can 
be readily adopted and applied to coaching and mentoring. By the same token, the 
same principles can be readily applied across different contexts, be that in sports or in 
the activity of international business corporations. Although the coaching practice 
advocated by Sir John and his sports coach Timothy Gallwey – the so-called ‘inner 
game’ – had been rooted in the psychology of coaching sports such as tennis and 
 skiing, from our perspective it was no surprise that the practice was soon drawn 
into the business world. Sir John continues his personal development in humanistic 
psychology and more recently he has rediscovered the link between transpersonal psy-
chology and his new style of coaching. As he commented in Coaching at Work, ‘even 
the most pragmatic of coaching interventions, such as daily task performance, are 
enhanced if the coach holds a transpersonal perspective’ (quoted in Hilpern, 2006). 
More importantly, Sir John links transpersonal coaching to the value of corporate 
social responsibility – the so-called triple bottom line (profit, people, and environment) 
that chief executives and managing directors should take on board, coaching and being 
coached throughout their organizations (see Chapters 7–9 for some of the theories 
and practices developed along this line).

Following the first edition of this book, my colleagues Stephen Palmer and Alison 
Whybrow (with whom i and other colleagues co-founded the BPS) edited The 
Handbook of Coaching Psychology, which was published in december 2007. The 
Handbook consists of a collection of chapters and offers a wide range of coaching 
approaches contributed by psychologists in the field. david Peterson (2009) criticized 
the coaching approaches included in the Handbook as mostly based on counselling 
psychology and therapeutic practice – while coaching should be rooted in positive 
psychology and non-clinical practice, as advocated in our first edition. We shall explore 
this foundation further in the next chapter.

on using therapeutic-based coaching approaches, douglas McKenna and Sandra 
davis (2009) argued that psychotherapy and coaching are similar and thus can be 
generalized when applying therapeutic approaches to coaching (and vice versa). They 
pointed out that psychologists (especially occupational and organizational psycholo-
gists) tended to overlook psychotherapy as a source of information (especially in terms 
of the outcome of its research). indeed the evidence-based practice that is routinely 
used in psychotherapy and in clinical and counselling psychology can yield invaluable 



 The Coming of Age 17

information for coaching practices. i shall describe in detail some of the methods for 
evaluating the coaching outcome in Chapter 10.

on the basis of thousands of studies, McKenna and davis identified four ‘active 
ingredients’ that account for most of the variance in the successful outcomes:

1 client factors (40 per cent);
2 the relationship or alliance (30 per cent);
3 placebo or hope (15 per cent);
4 theory and technique (15 per cent).

McKenna and davis (2009) also suggested that psychologists have training and experi-
ence that would enable them to leverage these active ingredients in coaching. However, 
there are certain areas in coaching where psychologists may need to have further training 
and continuous professional development experience. in this book i shall explore the 
active ingredients further and show how they can be integrated in the coaching practice.

When writing the first edition, i wondered whether coaching psychology was com-
ing of age in 2007. Alison Whybrow (2008) also questioned if coaching psychology 
was indeed coming of age. She asked:

•  What does it mean to be a ‘coaching psychologist’?
•  What has enabled coaching psychology to progress to the current state so quickly?
•  What is the scientific basis for coaching psychology?
•  What do coaching psychologists do?
•  How do coaching psychologists serve their clients?
•  How do psychologists and coaches become coaching psychologists?
•  What might that mean for this emergent professional area of psychological practice?

Whybrow argues that, to answer these questions, coaching psychologists would need 
to make their framework explicit and to share the standard of practice. She also strongly 
argued that coaching psychologists do clearly articulate their framework of practice.

The debate on the coaching psychology continues. Michael Cavanagh and david 
Lane (2012a) asked: ‘What does coming of age, or “growing up” in this world look 
like for us as practitioners, researchers and as a profession?’ drawing from the work of 
Ralph Stacey (1996) on strategic management and organizational dynamics, they 
highlighted the challenges we face today in the messy world of complexity; and they 
discussed the implications of these challenges for the practice of coaching and for 
coaching psychology – the profession and the research. The discussion generated 
quite a bit of debating, with responses from the academic world and from practi-
tioners in the field. debates seemed to be around the following issues:

•  coaching models;
•  professionalism;
•  evidence-based practice.

Coaching models

on coaching models, Cavanagh and Lane (2012a) advocated  systems thinking to 
inform coaching practice. in particular, they borrowed Stacey’s certainty/agreement 



18 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

matrix as a way to handle complexity. Like a cynefin (Snowden and Boone, 2007), this 
matrix provides a ‘map’ (that is, a spatial representation) to show how agreement and 
certainty interact. A boundary was drawn around the buffer zone (the grey area) – the 
interface between stability/instability and high/low agreement (so-called ‘the edge of 
chaos’). Within this grey area, one could not rely on rational approaches (such as 
mathematic modelling) to help decision making. Unfortunately one would never be 
able to predict the zone within which a decision for action has to be made. Furthermore, 
even within the zone of high stability/high agreement, a small fluctuation might esca-
late into unexpected chaos (this is known as ‘the butterfly effect’ – a systems prop-
erty). This renders the certainty/agreement matrix totally useless as a decision-making 
tool. Moreover, as a result, the matrix misrepresents the complexity of the real world 
and very often gives its users a wrong sense of security, making them believe that they 
are in control and could mobilize all sorts of decision-making techniques, depending 
on which zones they are operating in. These concerns were pointed out by Ralph 
Stacey himself in response to Cavanagh and Lane’s proposal (Stacey, 2012).

As for coaching approaches, drake advocated the narrative approach as a 
psychological framework for coaching, since it provides a structure and function that 
would help coaches to make sense of the coachee’s action within the system’s context 
(drake, 2008b).

in response to the debate on complexity and systems approaches, drake (2012) 
questioned its implications for coaching practice, and research, for instance by asking:

•  What does ‘complexity’ mean for coaches in practice (‘when they are sitting in 
front of their coachee’)?

•  How would one apply the systems approaches in coaching?
•  What are the implications for coaches’ conceptualizations, applications of evi-

dence and research?

Chapters 7 and 8 present a range of coaching techniques and practical exercises that 
include the narrative approaches within the systems framework.

despite all the disagreements and competing concerns, Cavanagh and Lane (2012b) 
argued that systems thinking provides a valuable contribution to coaching. one thing 
that the scholars do agree upon is the role of coaching:

The process of exploring stories in all situations requires mindful, reflective responsiveness 
rather than reactivity. The task here is for the coach and the client to notice and reflect on 
the qualitative themes present in the client’s situation, and to think through together the 
possible trajectories of outcome that any action might precipitate. This is not to suggest 
that the coach or client should seek to predict with any degree of certainty, what might 
unfold. Rather, the task is to hold those multiple possibilities in mind and take action that 
maximises the ability to respond flexibly as outcomes emerge. (Cavanagh and Lane, 
2012a: 82; reiterated with emphasis by Stacey, 2012: 95)

This is all about us exploring, thinking and reflecting together, as ‘reflective practi-
tioners’; and it is regarded as ‘the hallmark of the expert practitioner’ (Schön, 1983, 
1991 and Stacey, 2012 respectively). This book will explore reflective models and 
practice further.



 The Coming of Age 19

Professionalism

on the issue of professionalism, dr david drake introduced the term ‘postprofes-
sional’ as a frame for the future development of coaching psychology (drake, 2008a). 
Looking from the psychodynamic perspective and citing the work of donald Winnicott 
(1971), he regarded the role of coaches as one designed to provide ‘holding environ-
ments’ – a ‘container’ or ‘eco-system’ that holds the coachee’s anxiety; thereby both 
the coach and the coachee can create more adaptive responses in complex and chaotic 
environments. Here coaches would take a ‘de-centered’ position. drake regarded 
‘agency’ as an important function in the coachee’s development, in leadership and in 
decision making in complex environments (he is citing Weick, 1995, as an example).

evidence-based practice

Like many good coaches and coaching psychologists, Cavanagh and Lane (2012a: 88) 
cleverly posed their recommendations as questions to the reader. From reading the 
debates, with contributions from various colleagues as well as my own, it seems that, in 
order to respond to today’s challenges, coaching psychologists need to develop:

•  a new interdiscipline (‘a new sort of psychology’) that embraces diversity and 
‘cross-disciplinary engagement’ (Cavanagh and Lane, 2012a: 88);

•  research approaches that have rigour beyond the traditional methods;
•  training that enables coaching psychologists to be competent while working 

within the ambiguity and uncertainty of complex systems;
•  a profession that can help us to work within the complex and chaotic contexts of 

today’s world.

i hope that this book will contribute in some way to the above developments.

e-Coaching and Mentoring

With the development of the internet, and in response to the rising oil price, 
online options have been increasingly adopted by companies and organizations as 
alternative means of communication. Purple insight, a software company in 
Gloucestershire, UK, was spending £2,000 a month more on travel in 2005 than 
in the previous year. When the company switched to web conferencing, it saved 
£1,500 a month in travelling expenses. As the company grew, the saving was 
expected to grow to many thousands, as reported in Director (Higgins, 2005). 
Under the current economic condition in the UK, many institutions in the higher 
education sector are also expanding their distance-learning programme via virtual 
learning environment (VLe) software such as Moodle. For instance, the University 
of east London has been offering postgraduate coaching and coaching psychology 
programmes via distance learning since 2010. other programmes and institutions 
are following this trend.

From the author’s experience in leading the distance-learning modules, this virtual 
environment seems to be well received by the students. According to a student’s 



20 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

feedback, ‘the VLe provided the students with opportunities to share their experience 
and engage in conversation on the discussion forum, which was useful and aided 
understanding of the material’.

The e-mentoring has also been generally well received. This was highlighted by Hunt 
(2005: 7), who pointed out that ‘little is still known about the e-mentoring approach.

Some organizations have flirted with e-mentoring but few have come close to emulating 
the successes that have been achieved in the areas of business-to-business in the UK or 
business to university in the USA’ and this may be due to our lack of understanding of 
e-mentoring’s key features and benefits. He thus concluded that, ‘any e-mentoring 
program should be professional in its approach and design, be confidential for the partic-
ipants, be convenient enough that it fits in with the day-to-day work, be easy for partici-
pants to join and actively participate, be flexible and add value’ (Hunt, 2005: 10).

The convenience and flexibility of e-mentoring allows for regular informal communi-
cations between individuals or groups, enabling asynchronous (email) or synchronous 
exchanges (messenger or text). david Clutterbuck (2004: 164) proposed that a blend 
of methods and technologies could improve the mentoring process:

As technology becomes more sophisticated it is reasonable to assume that there will be 
much broader and more intelligent use of technologies. There will in particular be more use 
of video conferencing through desktop PCs and web cameras. in the future it seems likely 
that the majority of relationships will be hybrids of face-to-face remote and asynchronous 
textual exchanges. The evidence suggests that this has great potential to enrich the dialogue 
between mentors and mentees. Mentoring scheme co-ordinators will have to include the 
effective use of these technologies as an integral part of mentor and mentee training.

With the development of the internet and e-messaging, we have also noticed that 
some companies offer e-coaching or e-mentoring either as a stand-alone or as part of 
their training programmes. Much of the research has compared face-to-face with 
computer-mediated communication. Some of the results highlighted the danger of 
depending entirely on the technology. For example, people were found to be more 
aggressive and hostile over email than they were face to face (Kiesler, Siegel and 
McGuire, 1984). This led to concerns about the potential impact of loss of account-
ability in online communication, where individuals feel more distant from the target 
person and thus less careful and sensitive about how the communication will be 
received. in the 1990s such concerns diminished, as evidence of hostility was low. 
Several theories have been prominent in developing our understanding of how online 
communication differs from face-to-face communication.

There has been a range of studies indicating that trust may take longer to build in 
online relationships to begin with, but that final trust ratings are the same over time. For 
example, Tidwell and Walther (2002) have queried whether communicating face to face 
would actually be more personal and productive than communicating via electronic 
means. However, synchronicity might need more time to ‘cover the ground’, and that 
has been rarely factored in in studies where researchers have been looking at the same 
time controls in both comparison sets, for instance in face-to-face versus online ones.

other researchers have found that online relationships were moderately inter-
dependent, deep, committed (Parks and Floyd 1996), and gave a sense of predictability 



 The Coming of Age 21

and understanding (Swann, 1990). it has also been shown that those who already 
network socially are more likely to add the internet to the media they already use to 
socialize with, rather than to replace, them. Shy people have found it easier to open 
up on the internet, and initial disclosure is higher on the internet than in face-to-face 
situations (Bargh, McKenna and Fitzsimons, 2002).

More recent developments in online chatting have the benefit of immediacy. in 
many corporate teams working internationally members are in online meetings 
throughout the day and may even be in more than one meeting at a time, so the rate 
of communication in any one minute might be very productive. Many such teams 
now describe these simultaneous meeting routes as highly productive, but different 
from face-to-face meetings. For example, SGCP carried out most of its committee 
meetings via teleconferencing. it achieved significant cost savings. The practice was 
recommended by the Council of the BPS, which encouraged other committees to 
conduct their meetings using teleconferencing methods more often.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

To summarize, the coaching and mentoring industries have enjoyed a relatively high 
profile in recent business developments. Although most news and articles that were 
sampled reported a perceived positive outcome and business benefits, there has 
been very little objective evidence that helps us to predict enduring social and work 
partnerships in every aspect of coaching and mentoring, or diverse coaching and 
 mentoring relationships across all people and situations. encouragingly, there is some 
universality about aspects of the process that are positive from the reports gathered. 
Positive psychology offers some pointers to the further development of frameworks 
for coaching and mentoring. We need to ensure that the growing coaching and 
 mentoring practice remains aligned with sound psychological principles and that 
diversity is represented in all the forms of research methodology and sampling. We 
shall describe how the coaching and mentoring framework and programme can be 
implemented in Chapters 6 and 9 respectively.

i argue that, in order for a coherent generic framework to be to developed, the 
approaches have to be grounded in the psychology of learning. This forms the core 
topic of the next chapter. When coaching is grounded in psychology, it is perceived as 
the cutting edge, and there is a string of business cases for the proposed model (see 
Chapters 5 and 6). i hope that readers understand by now, from this chapter, not only 
the relationship between coaching, mentoring and psychology, but also their bene-
fits  (both as commodities and as social responsibilities) for individuals and their 
communities.

Coaching and mentoring can be understood from the perspective of positive psy-
chology in terms of one’s positive emotion within the present and future domains.

Using the ‘journey’ metaphor for coaching, one focuses on the  present – the here 
and now – as a primary concern and regards the future – the aspiration – as if it were 
real (see Figure  2.2). Another metaphor is that of playing chess. There are many 
options (say, within the GRoW model) in the middle game. This book aims to equip 
readers with some useful techniques and strategies for playing the middle game in 
coaching and mentoring (this will happen in Chapters 7 and 8). Both the systems 



22 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

approach and the research on learning (discussed next) suggest that the effective 
development of  coaching  psychology as a discipline requires an interdisciplinary enquiry 
into the  relevant theories and techniques.

A multicultural perspective has increasingly become a dominant ethical imperative 
for individual behaviours and for organizational practice. Multiculturalism is a moral 
movement with its own agenda, which is related to enhancing individual dignity, 
human rights and the recognition of marginalized groups (Fowers and Richardson, 
1996: 609). it resonates with the recent development in community psychology, 
which is beyond the scope of this book. However, Chapter 9 provides some examples 
of community coaching.

Coaches and mentors must decide how to deal with the influence of culture and 
socio-historical aspects of our time within their diverse communities. The concept of 
positive development must therefore be defined in terms of five dimensions (Jørgensen 
and nafstad, 2004):

1 motivation;
2 action;
3 goals;
4 context;
5 socio-temporal elements.

These dimensions offer us some direction towards furthering our research and 
 developing a universal framework that is cross-cultural. While to translate the positive 
psychology of optimal experience into coaching practice so as to enable everyone 
to enjoy a flow experience may be Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s dream, there are some 
key practical questions that require our attention. These are:

•  How do we guide coachees and mentees to achieve their optimal experience (the 
experience of flow)?

•  What are the techniques?
•  What are the measurements?

We shall explore some of the possible answers to these questions in our coaching/
mentoring journey of this second edition.

Here and now

Future is REAL

Start

Middle–many options

End-game

Figure 2.2 Coaching and mentoring paradigm



The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Philosophy and Theories 
of Learning Applicable to 
Coaching and Mentoring

Positive Psychology and the Learning Process

Introduction

This chapter describes the philosophy and theories of psychology that are applicable 
to coaching and mentoring. Positive psychology is identified as the philosophy that 
underpins coaching and mentoring. numerous learning theories that are relevant to 
coaching and mentoring are reviewed. First, the chapter will introduce the philosophy 
of positive psychology as a foundation for coaching. it will then give an overall discussion 
based on the general review of literature on the psychology of learning. Finally, some of 
the more generic learning theories are singled out for further development. These will 
form a building block in our development of a dynamic coaching and mentoring model 
and of a universal framework that is applicable across cultures.

Positive Psychology

Following his introduction to the 2000 edition of the American Psychologist, Martin 
Seligman (with his colleague Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi) published 16 articles on the 
topic of positive psychology (Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). The themes 
broached in these articles ranged from questions such as what enables happiness, what 
are the effects of autonomy and self-regulation, how optimism and hope affect health, 
or what constitutes wisdom to expositions on how talent and creativity come to fru-
ition. For example, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (1991) introduced the concept of flow to 
describe the optimal experience: the fact that people could improve the quality of their 
life by focusing on improving their experiences. This conscious attempt could be 
applied to all areas of one’s life: work, everyday experience or the search for meaning. 
The authors outlined a framework for a science of positive psychology. They had an 
optimistic view that this paradigm shift would enable us to understand and build the 
factors that allow individuals, communities, and societies to flourish in this new century.

3



24 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

in the UK, an exploratory workshop entitled ‘A Positive Agenda for occupational 
Psychology’, hosted by Pearn Kandola at oxford on 28 April 2005, described the 
emergence of positive psychology as ‘the scientific study of well-being and fulfilment’ 
and claimed that it ‘opens up new perspectives for occupational psychology. Bringing 
together theory, research and practice from disparate fields, it offers the possibility of 
an integrated and well-founded approach to enhancing the quality of working life and 
organizational effectiveness’ (quoted from the PowerPoint presentation at the 
workshop).

From our review of modern literature in psychology, which is not limited to 
learning theories, we have noticed that positive psychology is directly relevant to 
coaching and mentoring. Positive psychology is also concerned with the improve-
ment of performance and well-being (Linley and Harrington, 2006). it shares a 
similar paradigm shift from a pathology-orientated understanding to a perspective of 
growth and positive development. The shift is exemplified by Christopher Peterson 
and Martin Seligman’s (2004) presentation of their book Character Strengths and 
Virtues as a ‘Manual of the Sanities’, in direct contrast to the 1994 Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders sponsored by the American Psychological 
Association.

So we see positive psychology providing us with a possible foundation to improve 
quality of life, as well as coaching and mentoring practice. if this discipline were 
applied in the clinical setting, it would offer a promise to prevent illnesses and the 
sense of hopelessness and meaninglessness – and it would do it in a different way from 
how it’s done in classic psychotherapy and clinical psychology. More specifically, the 
european psychotherapeutic approach has been criticized as ‘culturally blind’, non-
universal, and biased in its over-emphasis on the pathological model (Law, 2004a, 
2004b). As a result of this approach, we live inherently in a culture that lacks positive 
features such as aspirations, wisdom, creativity, future-mindedness, courage, spiritu-
ality, responsibility, perseverance, hopes and dreams that make our lives meaningful 
and worth living.

Although positive psychology has been perceived as a new movement in modern 
psychology, its linage can be traced back throughout european psychology to Maslow 
(1968), Rogers (1963), Allport (1961), Jahoda (1958), Jung (1933), and as far back 
as James in 1902 (James, 1960); see Linley and Joseph (2004a, 2004b). Philosophically 
and culturally, it has a resonance in the Platonic and Aristotelian tradition, which is 
shared by all Western philosophies.

There are three ‘pillars’ of positive psychology in relation to the concept of a more 
positive and fulfilling life:

1 positive emotion – the pleasant life;
2 positive character – the engaged life;
3 positive institutions – the meaningful life.

A positive emotion such as happiness can be classified within three domains:

1 the past (satisfaction, contentment, fulfilment, pride and serenity);
2 the present (joy, ecstasy, calm, zest, ebullience, pleasure and flow);
3 the future (optimism, hope, faith, trust).



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 25

Coaching (and mentoring) can be understood from the perspective of positive 
 psychology (Kauffman and Scoular, 2004; Linley, 2004). Positive psychology covers 
enquires into human conditions such as happiness, wisdom, creativity, and human 
strengths. it has considerable potential for benefit – and this benefit extends to coach-
ing, so in this section we provide a detailed account of their area of overlap.

Sponsored by the Values in Action institute, Peterson and Seligman (2004)  conducted 
some research by means of a survey designed to measure human strengths. They found 
24 ‘signature strengths’, which were clustered into six dimensions:

1 wisdom and knowledge (creativity, curiosity, open-mindedness, love of learning, 
perspective): cognitive strengths that consist of knowledge acquisition and its 
application;

2 courage (bravery, persistence, integrity, vitality): emotional strengths that involve 
the exercise of the will to accomplish goals in the face of challenges, dangers, 
 difficulties, fears, obstacles, pains or threats;

3 humanity (love, kindness, social intelligence): interpersonal strengths that involve 
‘tending’ and ‘befriending’ others;

4 justice (citizenship, fairness, leadership): civic strengths that underlie a healthy 
community life;

5 temperance (forgiveness and mercy, humility and modesty, prudence, self- 
regulation): strengths that protect against excess;

6 transcendence (appreciation of beauty and excellence, gratitude, hope, humour, spir-
ituality): strengths that forge connections to the larger universe and provide meaning.

The 24 elements of strengths (with their sub-elements in the bracket) are as follows:

1 Creativity (originality, ingenuity): produce adaptive and original ideas or behaviour 
that have a positive contribution to your life or others’. Think of novel and produc-
tive ways of doing things. This strength covers artistic achievement but is not 
limited to it. We extend it to contributions to the organization, community and 
society.

2 Curiosity (interest, novelty seeking, openness to experience): explore and pursue nov-
elty, variety and challenge; seek experience for its own sake (for its intrinsic interest).

3 open-mindedness (judgement, critical thinking): search for evidence against 
your favoured belief, plans, goals, and weigh such evidence fairly when it is avail-
able. Think the situations through and examine them from all sides, without 
jumping to conclusions.

4 Love of learning: be positively motivated to acquire new skills and knowledge or 
to enhance existing skills and knowledge. This also associates with the strength of 
curiosity but goes beyond it to describe one’s tendency to learn systematically and 
improve what one already knows.

5 Perspective (wisdom): take a long-term view on the basis of your knowledge and 
experience. Provide wise counsel to others; look at the world that makes sense to 
yourself and to other people.

6 Bravery (valour): do what needs to be done voluntarily, despite fear in a  dangerous 
situation. Speak up for what is right even if there is opposition; act on convictions 
even if they are unpopular.



26 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

7 Persistence: finish a task despite obstacles and take pleasure in completing it. 
‘Get it out the door.’

8 integrity (authenticity, honesty): tell the truth and present yourself genuinely, 
but take responsibility for your feeling and act without pretence.

9 Vitality (zest, enthusiasm, vigour, energy): feel alive, have enthusiasm in what 
you do, even in difficult circumstances. Approach life with excitement and 
energy. Live life as an adventure.

10 Love: reciprocate, develop and value emotional relationships with family mem-
bers, friends, colleagues, coachees and mentees.

11 Kindness (generosity, nurture, care, compassion, altruistic love, niceness): be 
compassionate, helpful, nice to others. do favours and good deeds for others; 
help them; take care of them.

12 Social intelligence (emotional intelligence, personal intelligence): be aware of 
the emotion of other people and of your own. Process emotion (so-called ‘hot 
information’). Know what to do to fit into different social situations, and what 
makes other people tick. See Chapter 6 for more discussion about this element 
within our universal integrated framework.

13 Citizenship (social responsibility, loyalty, teamwork): identify with a common 
goal that is above your personal interests and includes the group of which you 
are a member. do your share and work well as a member of a group or team. Be 
loyal to the group.

14 Fairness: treat all people equally and without bias. Give everyone a fair chance.
15 Leadership: inspire group members to do what they are supposed to do, and at 

the same time keep a good relationship and high morale: this is the so-called 
transformational leadership (Tichy and devanna, 1986).

16 Forgiveness and mercy: let bygones be bygones instead of being negative. 
Forgive those who have done wrong. Give people a second chance instead of 
being vengeful.

17 Humility and modesty: let your accomplishments speak for themselves. 
Acknowledge your mistakes and imperfections.

18 Prudence: consider carefully the consequences of your actions in order to 
achieve long-term goals effectively.

19 Self-regulation (self-control): exercise control over your emotions and responses 
in order to achieve a desirable outcome.

20 Appreciation of beauty and excellence (awe, wonder, elevation, transcendence): 
appreciate and enjoy the experience of beautiful things such as art, music, foods 
and drinks and so on.

21 Gratitude: have a sense of thankfulness in response to gifts. Be aware of and 
thankful for the good things that happen. Take time to express thanks.

22 Hope (optimism, future-mindedness, future orientation): think about and work 
towards future outcomes positively. expect the best in the future and work to 
achieve it. Believe that a good future is something that can be brought about.

23 Humour (playfulness): laugh and tease; bring smiles to the faces of others skil-
fully. See the light side. Make (not necessarily tell) jokes.

24 Spirituality (religiousness, faith, purpose): have a coherent belief about the 
higher purpose and meaning of the universe and one’s place in it. Have beliefs 
about the meaning of life that shape conduct and provide comfort.



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 27

By examining the common characteristics of the elements of strength (thematic 
 analysis), Peterson and Seligman (2004) set up ten criteria for inclusion. The items 
listed above satisfied most of them. The ten criteria are:

1 being fulfilling for individuals (for the self and others);
2 being morally valued in its own right;
3 not diminishing others when displaying a strength;
4 having a non-felicitous opposite;
5 being trait-like;
6 having distinctiveness;
7 being a paragon;
8 being expressed by prodigies;
9 contrasting with the strengths of others (those who do not have such a strength);

10 being nurtured by institutions and rituals.

The optimism of positive psychology represents an attitudinal shift in psychology 
from its focus on individuals as asocial to individuals as socially, culturally and ethically 
responsible beings. Positive psychologists regard this as a fundamental cornerstone for 
meeting the challenge for change in our multicultural societies and in the face of 
globalization. For more recent developments in the research and applications of 
positive psychology, see for instance Hefferon and Boniwell (2011).

Linking Learning to Coaching and Mentoring

Many coaches and mentors argue that coaching and mentoring would function as a 
powerful lever to promote leaning and change. in this book we argue that, while 
coaching and mentoring offer such an opportunity for learning, this outcome could 
not be guaranteed as a ‘given’. For learning to take place, coach and coachees, men-
tors and mentees must actively engage in the learning process during the coaching 
and mentoring journey. So this epistemological position provides a starting point in 
asking more questions:

•  What is the ‘right condition’ for learning? What condition could lead to an 
‘Ah ha!’ experience?

•  How do coaching and mentoring sessions provide the condition for learning?
•  What factors does this condition consist of – for example, what assumptions, 

beliefs, ideas and values – and how do we establish them?

Coaching and mentoring as a learning process

Coachees and mentees as well as coaches and mentors are all learners. We thus regard 
coaching and mentoring as learning processes. While the learning condition includes 
both physical and social aspects, there are likely to be many barriers in the process of 
learning. Most of these barriers are psychological (the so-called ‘inner game’: see 
Gallwey, 2000). These inner barriers may have developed from individuals’ negative 
experiences in the past. Many people had negative experiences with learning, and this 



28 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

may prevent them from learning further, new materials. This in turn forms a negative 
feedback loop, which hinders future learning. on the other hand, positive learning 
experiences can help coachees to develop their capacity for further learning. This 
in turn forms a positive feedback loop. For example, participants in coaching 
 programmes were asked to list:

1 the negative experiences they have had in the past, which may stand in the way of 
change;

2 the attributes of a poor coach;
3 the attributes of a good coach.

in response, many of the participants responded with memories of their own teachers 
and lecturers.

From all this we learn that the essence of learning, be it in teaching, training, 
coaching or a mentoring context, seems to be universal. To learn, one must embrace 
(internalize) a new set of values, attitudes, skills or knowledge that one did not have 
before (for child developmental learning, see Kegan, 1982, 1994). in this context, 
the learner’s task is to internalize the socio-cultural-temporal surround of the new 
situation (Jarvis, 1987).

The coach’s task is to help learners bring to their awareness what was internalized 
in the past. The process is known as mapping the landscape of action on the 
landscape of consciousness, in a narrative approach (see Chapter 7 for techniques 
and tools).

Clients tend to focus on learning that connects to the context of their workplace, 
in particular in executive coaching. it is therefore helpful to provide a number of case 
studies that may help readers to identify their own context.

The Psychology of Learning

Historically, the study of learning was divided according to two ways of thinking – 
epistemological and experimental:

1 epistemology questions the nature of what we know, asking what knowledge is 
and how we distinguish it from our own internal thoughts and beliefs.

2 experimental approaches derive theories by conducting scientific experiments.

There are three kinds of learning theories within the epistemological tradition. 
These are:

1 Objectivism Reality is external and independent from the learner. Knowledge is 
acquired through sensory experience.

2 Pragmatism Reality is both external and internal. Although reality exists, it is pro-
visional, as it cannot be known directly. Knowledge is interpreted through signs 
and negotiated from experience and reason.

3 Interpretivism Reality is internal, relative to individuals’ frames of reference. 
Knowledge is constructed by the learner through thinking.



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 29

experimental approaches have generated four major learning theories:

1 The principle of association one learns ideas by direct association. This was 
 demonstrated in 1885 by ebbinghaus (1850–1909) through the famous verbal 
learning experiments of nonsense syllables, which produced the classic forgetting 
curve (ebbinghaus, 1913). ebbinghaus argued that meaning did not influence 
learning and that the prior knowledge we store in our memory has no effect on 
what we continue to learn.

2 The law of effect one learns by associating sensation/impulse to action (proposed 
by Thorndike, 1874–1949).

3 Classical conditioning one naturally generates a response (unconditioned response) 
to a stimulus (unconditioned stimulus). An example would be the secretion of 
saliva when food is presented. The same response can be produced by pairing the 
unconditioned stimulus with a neutral stimulus. over time, the neutral stimulus 
alone can elicit the same response. The stimulus and response are now called 
conditioned stimulus and conditioned response respectively (this theory was 
advanced by Pavlov, 1949–1946).

4 Gestalt theory originated from the perception of motion from flashing light (the 
phi phenomenon). Gestalt psychologists propose that knowledge acquisition 
requires the learner to actively impose organization (gestalt) on sensory data in 
order to derive insight (insightful learning).

According to gestalt theory of insightful learning, there are five stages of learning:

1 The learner goes through a period of trial and error.
2 The learner completely grasps the solution. This seems to occur suddenly 

(an ‘Ah ha!’ moment).
3 The learner produces a smooth error-free performance.
4 The knowledge is long-lasting.
5 The learner can apply the same principle to solve a similar problem in a new 

context.

Psychological research has indicated that there is a lot we can do to optimize our 
chances of achieving effective outcomes when we act as learners, having exchanges 
in purposeful relationships designed to bring about new knowledge and skills. Self-
determination, autonomy, participation and choice underpin many studies about 
learning participation (Spreitzer, 1995). Social learning theories, and particularly 
the reinforcement affect model, continue to influence our understanding of 
learning in collaborative settings (Clore and Byrne, 1974). in short, this model 
assumes that we like anyone who or anything that makes us feel good and dislike 
anything that or  anyone who makes us feel bad. Rewards in relationships can 
include attention or being attended to, praise and positive interaction. As learners, 
we will do better when we are in a receptive environment where we feel attended 
to and supported. in a different kind of setting the transferability of these theories 
is limited. Self determination, autonomy and choice are often, in certain cultures, 
preferred values for a range of behaviour, and the interpretation of positive inter-
action may vary from setting to setting. For example, autonomy might be very 



30 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

valued in one company but be considered averse to teamwork in another, which 
prefers compliance with a procedural framework.

Another commonly cited element in learning success in developmental relation-
ships is goal setting for learners (Locke, Shaw, Saari and Latham, 1981). Goal setting 
has been a Western preoccupation and may not be automatically meaningful across all 
cultures and situations. even in studies in europe, where coaches have been asked to 
work in coaching relationships without clear goal boundaries, coaching participants 
have evidenced no negative outcomes as a result (Law, ireland and Hussain, 2005). 
increasingly over the years, practitioners have started to talk more about emergent 
learning, unstructured learning, informal learning and the idea that all this may be 
more exploratory and less rigidly goal-restrained than was previously thought.

Likewise, our fixation with linking evaluation to development has meant that we 
have used traditional goal-based structures to facilitate evaluation processes, which 
have gained credibility through the hard core of scientific data from research. new 
developments, in particular the wider acceptance of looser structures for evaluation in 
social science, such as appreciative enquiry, have liberated us from some of those con-
straints. Appreciative enquiry is more able to address relative and individualized 
progress within the context of operation rather than progress against preset targets.

on the basis of the principles of positive psychology described earlier, we can iden-
tify what we are already able to do but need to do more of. We can also identify areas 
where our capabilities are weak and where we need to update our skills and knowledge. 
We can check our motivation to achieve our goals and our levels of self-efficacy 
(Bandura, 1982).

The self-efficacy concept comes from social cognitive theory. it is a belief in 
one’s own capacities to achieve a given goal (Bandura, 1997). Self-efficacy also links 
expectation to action/behaviour and outcome. There are three possible types of outcome 
that one could expect (Bandura, 1986, 1997):

1 physical effect as a consequence of one’s direct action (e.g. pain or pleasure);
2 social effect (e.g. approval, recognition etc);
3 self-evaluative effect (reflective).

While outcome expectancies refer to the perception of the possible consequences 
of one’s action, self-efficacy expectancy refers to personal action, control or agency. 
A person who believes in being able to produce a desired effect can conduct a more 
active and self-determined life course. This ‘can do’ thinking represents a sense of 
control over the environment. it reflects the belief that you can control challenging 
environmental demands by means of taking adaptive action. individuals with high 
self-efficacy choose to perform more challenging tasks, anticipate optimistic scenarios 
and are active in identifying knowledge and skill sets that can help them overcome 
barriers and achieve their learning goals. According to Bandura (1977, 1982, 1997) 
there are four ways to influence one’s self-efficacy:

1 by providing feedback on learners’ own capabilities (enactive mastery 
experiences);

2 by providing comparative information about the attainments of others (vicarious 
experiences);



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 31

3 by telling learners what others believe them capable of achieving (verbal persuasion);
4 by letting learners judge their own ability to engage in the task at hand (physiological 

states).

Four conditions for continuous motivation and self-regulation (known as the ARCS 
model of motivational design) are proposed by Keller (1984). These conditions are:

•  to gain and sustain attention;
•  to enhance relevance;
•  to build confidence;
•  to generate satisfaction.

To summarize, to design a coaching and mentoring process may involve the fol-
lowing steps:

1 analysing the coachees and mentees;
2 defining motivational objectives;
3 designing a motivational strategy;
4 implementing the plan of action;
5 evaluating and reviewing.

There are numerous motivation theories that can be applied to the study of the 
motivation of learners. Maslow (1954, 1968) put forward a model of hierarchical 
needs. People are motivated to satisfy their psychological, safety, belonging, self- 
esteem and self-actualization needs. These needs represented conditions that 
learning partners might seek to establish in order to maximize learning outcomes. 
Psychology has traditionally recognized the power and role of beliefs in shaping 
reality. Theories have been put forward with belief systems in the mix, or where 
beliefs alone are central to understanding behaviour. Merton (1948), in line 
with the latter tradition, introduced the concept of self-fulfilling prophecy, to refer 
to a false belief that leads to its own fulfilment. Such beliefs are associated with 
under-achievement, social stereotyping and discriminatory behaviour. in learning 
situations, individuals with low expectations and beliefs about themselves – which 
are perhaps the result of what others have communicated to them (e.g. ‘you won’t 
do well’) – tend to deliver according to expectation, so they don’t perform well. 
When negative and limiting expectations are extended to the stereotyping of groups, 
under-achievement might follow.

This individualized self-fulfilling prophecy approach has been criticized, because 
recent studies show that the impact of self-fulfilling prophecy is low and other factors 
are more significant in determining behaviour and outcomes. The self-fulfilling 
prophecy has been used to explain the under-achievement of minority groups. it 
 conveniently places the problem of under-achievement in the lap of the minorities 
themselves. it suggests that there is a real deficit in their belief systems, which results 
in their under-achievement and indirectly limits their successful engagement in 
processes that would help them be successful. extensions to an inter-group perspective 
recognize that the false beliefs may be communicated and maintained by the majority 
culture. However, there is less financial sponsorship dedicated to re-aligning the beliefs 



32 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

of majority cultures. Secondly, individual minority success (which defies predictions 
using this model) is rarely celebrated in ways that are likely to shift majority opinion.

Vroom (1964) has been credited with creating the expectancy valence theory, 
where there needs to be positive correlations between efforts and performance, 
favourable performance results and desirable rewards. Rewards satisfy important 
needs, and the desire to satisfy the need is strong enough to make the effort worth 
while. This approach has been criticized for a lack of inclusion of normalized and rou-
tine behaviour, which is particularly embedded in cultures.

Many Western psychological concepts are seen as the absolute ‘truth’, when in fact 
they are limited in their scope when it comes to describing and predicting behaviour 
across the diverse communities in which people engage in learning. Learning goes 
beyond concepts of individual difference, and particularly beyond our modern fasci-
nation with self-management. Learning might stem more from the interplay between 
the individual learner and the environment in which he or she operates.

even the nurture–nature debate appears in a different light in a world of diversity, 
where science and technology are interacting before we are born, determining the core 
of our being. For example, genetic research and the standardization of aspects of nur-
ture such as the core educational curriculum wrap around care and national standards 
to ensure the homogenization of nurture in institutional settings. Conceptually, the 
whole debate is limited by the primary assumption that nature and nurture are elements 
that are completely separate from each other and can be judged in terms of the 
independent and distinctive influence of each on the subject learner. But there are many 
counter-assumptions that we are indistinguishable from our environment and that 
nature and nurture are entwined in such a fundamental way that no valid measurement 
could be used to isolate the contribution of one independently from the contribution of 
the other. Secondly, this debate has often failed to recognize that we are changed by our 
environment while we are also an agent of its change, and that learning comes from the 
experience of the interplay between these two sides of the coin.

The context of operation and an appreciation of the other players are key to our 
learning success. At times the context in which we operate has fixed elements, which 
may limit our learning goals or the methods we employ, and at other times it is 
something we can shape entirely. However, this context is rarely as fixed as we pre-
sume, and the learning starts by ensuring that we are able to accurately construe our 
environment, to define the culture and its players and to be clear about what is fixed 
and what is fluid.

naturally, the environment is ever changing, and we are also always changing adap-
tively, in light of our emerging learning and insights. We need therefore to integrate 
our own learning into new goals (if applicable), at the same time as keeping up with 
the contextual and cultural changes that affect our relationships and purpose.

our perception of fixed elements and fluid elements in the culture of operation is 
also impacted by such things as the perceived locus of control (Rotter 1956). in the 
locus of control model (which is part of social learning theory), there is a general 
expectation that one’s behaviour is or is not directly related to the outcome. depending 
on their perceptions, individuals attribute the source of the power to change particular 
life events to internal factors, to external factors or to chance. Hence one person 
might see more elements in his or her environment as fixed beyond his or her control 
than another. Such impressions may impact on our learning strategies and styles.



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 33

Locus of control theory is also problematic in terms of how it explains cross- cultural 
differences. Control tends to be a Western higher order priority, which is not always 
transferred globally. destiny and fatalism, reticence, putting others’ needs before one’s 
own, and reflection may have a lower value than a ‘think can do quickly’ approach 
endorsed in Western contexts.

Learning Theories Revisited

This section combines the pragmatic and interpretive approaches described in the 
 earlier section and aims to re-examine the key learning theories within this tradition, 
both past and present, which inform coaching and mentoring practice. From the 
 literature review, a whole family of theories emerge that are relevant in this context 
(e.g. Belenky, Clinchy, Goldberger and Tarule, 1986; Loevinger and Blasi, 1976; 
Perry, 1970; Kegan, 1982, 1994; Kolb, 1984; Mezirow, 1991, 2000; Freire, 1992; 
Lave and Wenger, 1991; and Wenger 1998). These include:

•  the learning process;
•  reflective learning;
•  constructive–developmental theories;
•  social learning theories.

The learning process

Learning, like coaching, is a process that has a beginning, a middle, and an end (and 
we can use journey as a metaphor here too). it is like a wheel (Figure 3.1), as in 
Kolb’s (1984) learning cycle, except that some of the positions of the elements 
have been changed in relation to coaching and mentoring. As a starting point, 

Concrete experience

Reflection

Abstract conception

Action 

External 
transformation: 
towards
behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

Figure 3.1 The learning wheel (modified from Kolb’s (1984) learning cycle)



34 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

learning is grounded in a concrete experience when learners and coach interact 
(the point of social engagement).

our learning wheel consists of four stages of learning:

1 concrete experience;
2 reflection;
3 abstract conception;
4 action.

Concrete experience For learning to take place, first the learners need to experience an 
event. This provides the individuals with a starting point in understanding how they 
experience the situation and handle any problems or challenges in relation to the world.

Reflection The value of reflective practice has been well recognized as a framework 
for our professional learning and development in coaching and psychology (for 
example, for coaching in sport psychology, see Anderson, Knowles and Gilbourne, 
2004). After experiencing the event, learners also need to appreciate the nature of 
their experience and to take time to reflect upon it (Merriam, 1994). it would be 
desirable to think about the lessons learnt (how and what). This involves comparing 
the present event with the past experience and thinking about the future possibilities 
(this is pattern matching within the schema structure). it is also important for learners 
to reflect on themselves as learners. Learning is ‘a way of being’ (Vaill, 1996). 
Reflection is viewed by a lot of practitioners in education as an important part of 
learning. it is also an essential element in leadership development as well as in the 
development of coaches and mentors, so we shall devote the next section to exploring 
this stage in greater detail.

Abstract conception Through reflection, this is a process designed to translate the 
experience into a meaningful concept. (See the later section on meaning.)

Action We define the term ‘action’ quite broadly (in contrast to Kolb, who narrowly 
refers to the end stage of the learning cycle as an active experimentation). Action may 
include a decision arrived at through reflection and evaluation of an event. Thus 
action could include an option not to act.

For the wheel to roll forward in the learning process, two forms of transformation are 
required: upward and forward. The upward movement reflects an internal transfor-
mation from concrete experience to the formation of a new consciousness (abstract 
conception). The forward movement indicates a behavioural shift from internal reflec-
tion to external action.

Knowledge, resulting from this process, is a combination of grasping the everyday 
experience and transforming it into an abstract concept. From our experience, we 
have also found that there are considerable individual differences among coachees and 
mentees in terms of their strengths and weaknesses in the learning process. Some are 
good at producing knowledge (thinkers), while others are quick to act (actors). Some 
enjoy engaging in actual events and learning from experience (sensors), while others 
prefer to reflect upon their experience (evaluators). The four modes of learning – as 



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 35

sensor, thinker, evaluator, and actor – define an individual’s learning styles (see 
Table 3.1).

Moreover, learners who are internally focused on their locus of control are more 
likely to focus on goal-setting for themselves and on the development of self-efficacy 
(evaluators and thinkers), whereas externally focused individuals are more likely to be 
receptive to external feedback and sensitive to the environment around them (actors 
and sensors). People who attribute causality to chance or fate might be more passive 
in their engagement with causality. Those who have achieved the mastery of all four 
learning styles are known as reflective practitioners. Reflective practitioners are able to 
grasp the concrete experience and transform it into action through reflection and con-
ceptualization. in coaching and mentoring (and also in many learning professions 
such as education and psychology), we aim to develop learners’ competence so that 
they may become reflective practitioners. As the term suggests, reflection is an impor-
tant element in this learning process. We explore this further in the next section.

Reflective learning

in its simplest form, learning can be viewed as having the potential to transform. This 
may be achieved through reflection and action (praxis), whereby a new consciousness 
emerges (conscientization: Freire, 1992). Through this learning process, individuals 
become free from their limiting beliefs and arrive at an informed and reflective decision 
(emancipatory learning: Mezirow, 1996).

As seen from the previous section, reflection is an important driver for transforma-
tion within the learning process according to Kolb’s (1984) learning cycle. For, 
without reflection, people would not learn from their experience; they would con-
tinue to experience the world in which the same emotion and perception occur in a 
‘self-confirming loop’ (Brookfield, 1991; Jarvis, 1992). From the above assertions we 
can clearly conclude that reflection is a cognitive function that may occur even when 
the individuals are away from the situation where the event has taken place. it may 
occur from memory, by remembering the experience. We thus define reflection as 
a  cognitive process that involves both thinking and feeling about an experience (past 
or  present): from this thinking and feeling a new consciousness emerges with a new 
 appreciation, understanding and insight about that experience.

our definition resonantes with the opinions of many other scholars in the field (see 
Brookfield 1991; Boud, Keogh and Walker, 1985: 19). The definition implies that 
reflection is a metalevel of information processing where individuals interpret their 
thinking, learning and understanding, paying attention to their own assumptions, 
beliefs and values, which might shape their conclusion. Reflection is effectively a form 
of internal self-assessment, which could be made explicit by disclosing it to others 
 verbally, in a coaching session, or through writing – in the form of an essay, letter or 

Table 3.1 Learning styles

Internal Transformation External Transformation

internal Cognition Thinker evaluator
external Perception Sensor Actor



36 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

diary (see Chapter 7). Such disclosure, known as a reflective account, is beneficial for 
both learners and coaches: it helps them to understand their own experience and draw 
conclusions or a plan of action from it.

The reflection stage within the learning wheel can further be expanded into a sub-
loop with six finer stages, as shown in Figure 3.2 (see, for example, Gibb, 1988):

1 description: describe what happened during the concrete experience.
2 Cognition and emotion: reflect on your thoughts and feeling. What were you 

thinking/feeling during the engagement/incident?
3 Analysis: try to understand what happened and draw meaning from the experi-

ence. What sense can you make of the experience?
4 evaluation: assess the pros and cons, benefit and cost of the outcome of the 

experience.
5 Conclusion: summarize the meaning and the lessons learned; look for improve-

ment. in the light of what happened, would you have done it differently? What 
else could you have done?

6 Recommendation/action plan: recommend a future plan of action for further 
learning and improvement. if a similar situation arose again, what would you do? 
What are you going to do to further improve and develop yourself/performance?

We have modified Gibb’s six-stage model of reflection, as we felt that analysis is closely 
linked to the conclusion but should be its prerequisite. As the saying goes, ‘don’t 
jump to conclusions’ without an analysis and without making sense of the  experience. 
Conclusions should follow logically from the evaluation, with possible recommenda-
tions for future action. This framework also fits well within our dynamic coaching/
mentoring/learning model, with meaning as an intervening variable (to be discussed 
later).

3. Analysis

5. Conclusion:
abstract conception

Action 

External 
transformation: 
towards
behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

2. Cognition and emotion

4. Evaluation 6. Action
plan  

1. Description: Concrete experience

Figure 3.2 Six substages of reflection (combined models from Kolb, 1984, and Gibb, 1988)



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 37

in making a critical reflection of the coaching process itself, coaches and mentors 
would experience a dialectic tension, in the sense that, on one hand, the experience in 
coaching and mentoring is usually rich in physical motion and emotion, while on the 
other a reflective account is always anchored around ‘levels of cognitive engagement’. 
These levels of cognitive engagement may be aligned with Haberman’s (1971) three 
levels of cognitive interest, as follows (Gilbourne, 2006):

1 Technical cognitive interest: relates to a limited form of reflection such as account-
ability, effectiveness and efficiency.

2 Practical cognition: valuates and reviews the consequences of actions and their 
underlying meaning for practice.

3 intuition: associates with emancipatory processes and ethics (in this case, with a 
transpersonal spirit – a spirit that is beyond oneself).

in practice, the three levels overlap. Level 3 may act as an overarching reflective scaf-
folding from which one may choose to climb up or down. The form of self-assessment 
given above is part of a critical reflection that involves individuals in making authentic, 
objective judgements about themselves (Boud, 1995; Marienau, 1999). in the pro-
cess, learners would gain a greater appreciation of the influence they have on their 
own learning and future possibilities. Self-development becomes a natural outcome of 
the reflective process.

Constructive–developmental theories

Constructive–developmental theories link developmental growth to meaning 
construction (Perry, 1970; Loevinger and Blasi, 1976; Belenky et al., 1986; Kegan, 
1982, 1994). As the name of the theories suggest, many advocates of this approach 
link the theory of learning to the child development process (Piaget, 1954; Loevinger 
and Blasi, 1976; and Kohlberg, 1981). Constructive–developmental theories are 
essentially cognitive development theories within the paradigm of constructivism. 
Constructivism assumes that knowledge is constructed from our experience of the 
world, with many signs and symbols (hypermedia), through a critical discourse. in 
this section i shall highlight some of the major theories that may be relevant to coach-
ing and mentoring.

Piaget’s theory of child development
in european counties and generally in the West, Piaget’s proposed stages of child 
development have been widely applied over the past few decades in the design of the 
educational curriculum. His views continue to attract the interest of teachers, students 
and parents. Within the context of coaching and mentoring, Piaget’s theory of stages 
may have implications for mentoring in school and for parenting of children and 
young people. These stages of cognitive development are briefly outlined below:

1 Sensorimotor (from birth to age 2) This stage is linked to the development of 
sensory perception and the ability to respond via motor reflexes (grasping and 
sucking during the first eight months are examples of such responses). Gradually 
children develop an awareness of the world around them; for example, they 



38 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

become aware of hidden objects (object performance), and they actively explore 
objects for their own pleasure (for example, they manipulate objects to seek 
attention, or they imitate the behaviour of others – the role-models; and this 
includes deferred imitation – that is, imitation that takes place even after the role 
models have gone).

2 Preoperational (ages 2–7) Children acquire language and develop an ability for 
thinking in terms of symbols or symbolic representation (for example ‘X = apple’) 
and for imagination with mental imagery. At this stage children would only see the 
world from their own perspective (they are egocentric), and they hold a relatively 
static view of the world (centration).

3 Concrete operations (ages 7–12) Children develop an ability for logical reasoning 
applied to concrete objects and events; they also develop or acquire multiple 
 viewpoints (for example, they realize that the same object may have different 
appearances – the conservation concept).

4 Formal operations (ages 12–25) Young people are able to perform abstract 
reasoning and make hypotheses to predict outcomes.

one should note that the above stages are somewhat theoretical and abstract. in  practice, 
the boundaries between them are blurred. There are various deviations from this 
abstract model of developmental stages among children across the world. Social–cultural 
influences on child development should not be underestimated. For the  application of 
coaching and mentoring in education, see work by Pask and Joy (2007) and van 
nieuwerburgh (2012).

in coaching and mentoring we argue that development does not stop in adulthood. 
Given the right conditions, most adults continue to learn throughout their lives. 
Theories of adult development would be more applicable to most coaching and 
 mentoring in and outside the workplace.

Levinson’s life structure theory
on the basis of results from the interviews of 40 men aged between 35 and 45 and 
using the metaphor of seasons, Levinson, darrow, Klein, Levinson and McKee (1978) 
identified the following life stages:

1 spring (childhood and adolescence: from birth to the age of 16)
2 summer (early adulthood: 17–40)
3 autumn (middle adulthood: 41–60)
4 winter (late adulthood: 60+)

each stage represents a period of transition that is characterized by the development 
of hopes and dreams, consolidation, evaluation in the face of challenges, further 
change in life (e.g. identity crises and self-doubts) and re-evaluation in relation to the 
reality of one’s world view. For instance:

1 Early adult transition (17–22) As one enters adulthood, there is a sense of excite-
ment about establishing independence in relation to one’s own parents. one 
opens up to a new world of ideas, embracing its uncertainty about where one 
stands in relation to one’s own aspirations. one has choices to make: entering 



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 39

further or higher education, entering a career or establishing a family. At such a 
critical  juncture, one may experience self-doubt about one’s own ability to cope 
with the change in responsibility, as one senses the world’s expectations and 
demands (Who am i? What kind of person do i want to become?).

2 Provisional adulthood (22–28) This is a period of establishing one’s competence at 
being independent along one’s chosen path of development.

3 Age 30 transition (28–33) Around this age, one is likely to settle down with a 
job  and develop one’s career. However, one may sometimes question one’s 
own  commitment to one’s organization or to the relationship one is engaged 
in (is this what i really want to do, to become? Whom do i want to be with?). 
one  has  choices: to leave the job and change one’s circumstances; or to 
end a relationship.

4 Settling down (33–40) This is the time to grow roots and reap the fruit of earlier 
efforts.

5 Mid-life transition (40–45) Around the age of 40, one may recognize one’s own 
unfulfilled ambitions (lost hopes or broken dreams). one may feel tired of what 
one is doing and begin to question one’s own commitment again, asking deeper 
questions (What is the meaning of life? What is it all about?) This critical moment 
is often called mid-life crisis.

6 Restabilization (45–50) At this stage, one is likely to settle down with an 
established career. it is the time to bear fruit, develop still further and mentor 
others.

7 Age 50 transition (50–55) This is another critical moment for self-reflection (per-
haps the result of another lost hope or broken dream); at the same time one feels 
somewhat out of touch with what is going on out there in relation to the younger 
generation; one has a sense of loss and regret for opportunities missed in the past 
(What have i achieved? What do i really value?).

8 Middle adulthood (55–60) one’s inner calm is restored. one may realize one’s 
limit, experience uncertainty about one’s own longevity and realign one’s prior-
ities, in life and in relationships. one can afford to make choices in accordance 
with one’s own value and sense of identity. one may develop still further and 
make one’s assets grow; alternatively, one may choose to disengage from work or 
re-engage in new work or in a new enterprise.

9 Late adult transition (age 60–65) This probably represents the final stage of 
transition, during which one may need to plan ahead for the remaining years. 
Further reflection may take place, and hopefully one can enjoy the rest of life.

Later on, Levinson (1997) interviewed 45 women aged 35 to 45 and found that, 
although women may go through similar life stages, the rhythm of change tends to be 
different and they tend to be more concerned with the family and social aspects of life. 
Again, we need to be cautious about applying the life stages theory presented above 
too rigidly when we assess one’s development. The theory was developed on the basis 
of a study of a small number of people within the American culture. it could not 
accommodate the diversity of human development. in particular, it does not pay heed 
to different life stages, which mark the rites of passage for people of a different sexual 
orientation, race, culture, religion and belief. For instance, the ‘late adult transition’ 
phase (60–65) usually represents the stage of retirement, construed in relation to the 



40 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

normal retirement age in Western societies. However, even in the West, the situation 
is now changing as a result of recent employment legislation, which in turn responds 
to changes in life expectancy and economic conditions.

The social constructive paradigm and cognitive–developmental theories:  
Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development
Within the constructive paradigm, among the cognitive–developmental theorists, 
there are two forerunners whose ideas are relevant to learning, coaching and mentor-
ing: Lev S. Vygotsky (1896–1934) and Jerome Bruner (b. 1915). Both regarded the 
role of culture as instrumental to cognitive growth and as an amplification of human 
intellectual power.

Central to Bruner’s theory is the idea of knowledge representation and how the 
representation of knowledge is used by children and adults to assist them in their 
understanding of the world. Bruner (1964) regards the process of learning as consist-
ing of three specific stages of knowledge representation:

1 Enactive representation The knowledge is represented in the physical action. 
Although one may not be able to describe the knowledge, one is able to explain 
it through action, as if the muscle has its own memory (motor responses) – for 
example, by pointing out a direction.

2 Iconic representation This is a spatial–temporal imagistic representation of the per-
ceptual input, and it is based on the experience of events in the world.

3 Symbolic representation This is the expression of learning to use signs and  symbols – 
for example, language, to describe an experience of the world.

Through a number of experiments in which children were introduced to a series of 
problem-solving tasks of progressive difficulty, Vygotsky (1962, 1978) revealed the 
existence of a learning gap between an ‘actual developmental level’ and a higher level 
of ‘potential development’ under the guidance of, or in collaboration with, more 
sophisticated peers. This gap is called the zone of proximal development, and it is rele-
vant to our discussion of the coaching definition (as exemplified by Tony Grant; see 
Chapter 4). People consult coaches and mentors when they face barriers that prevent 
them from improving their performance at work or from fulfilling some aspiration in 
their lives. in other words – they ‘got stuck’. in these situations people tend to repro-
duce the problem solutions or the behaviours that are familiar to them from past 
experience. Adopting Vygotsky’s developmental method, this gap between the known 
and familiar, and what is possible to know and do, can be understood in terms of the 
‘zone of proximal development’.

Although Vygotsky’s research focuses on child development and childhood 
learning, in our coaching and mentoring context the concept of a zone of proximal 
development is also relevant to adult learning. We could regard coaching and 
 mentoring as a form of social collaboration. in this collaboration the skilled coach or 
mentor provides supported learning tasks, which are within the reach of the coachees 
or mentees but require the investment of significant effort. Through this social col-
laboration, with the help of a set of goals, challenges and actions, coachees and men-
tees have the opportunity to distance themselves from their immediate experience of 
the world and to move towards what might be possible to know.



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 41

This development of complex thinking provides a foundation for the development 
of ‘concepts’. The development of a concept presupposes more than unification. To 
form a concept it is also necessary to abstract, to single out elements, and to view the 
abstracted elements apart from the totality of the concrete experience in which they 
are embedded.

This conceptual development provides a foundation for the learner to intervene in 
the shaping of his or her own actions and life. The learner is now able to operate with 
these concepts independently, according to the demands of the task, and with an 
awareness of these operations, understanding them to be processes of a certain kind. 
it is this development that leads to self-mastery. This concept of development is the 
foundation of deliberate attention, logical memory, abstraction, and the ability to 
compare and to differentiate (Vygotsky, 1962). This development of conceptual 
thought is the foundation of personal agency. it is by developing concepts and 
personal agency that learners begin to inhabit their own lives.

in this scaffolding of proximal development, coachees are supported in performing 
manageable learning tasks, called ‘distancing tasks’, as they incrementally and pro-
gressively ‘travel’ from one zone to another. According to Vygotsky, there are five 
levels of distancing tasks:

1 Low level: tasks that encourage people to characterize specific objects/events of 
their world (characterization of initiative; description).

2 Medium level: the development of chains of association (‘complexes’) by establish-
ing relations between these objects and events (relation: initiative in relationship; 
analyses/pattern matching).

3 Medium to high level: tasks of reflecting about, realizing, and learning about 
specific phenomena from the chains of association (evaluation).

4 High level: tasks that abstract the reflection, realization and learning from their 
concrete and specific circumstances in the formation of concepts about life and 
identity (understanding, making judgements and decisions).

5 Very high level: tasks that formulate the planning for and the initiation of actions; 
tasks that predict the outcome of specific actions founded upon this concept 
development (conclusion/recommendation).

Vygotsky’s learning theory and narrative coaching
Vygotsky’s idea of constructing a scaffolding to help the learner create a bridge 
 between zones of proximal development has been embedded in narrative therapy 
(White, 1997, 2000, 2006). When i first introduced the narrative approach to one of 
the community coaching programmes in the UK during 2006, narrative coaching was 
a relatively novel application (Law, 2006b; Law, Aga and Hill, 2006; Hall, 2006b: 10; 
see also the case study in Chapter 9 for an example of the application). Similar devel-
opments of narrative coaching have also been advocated by david drake (2006, 2007, 
2008b, 2009) in Australia and by Reinhard Stelter (2007, 2009) in denmark. While 
my collaborators and i ground coaching in narrative approaches, these developments 
have evolved quite independently. The theoretical foundation of drake’s approach 
seems rooted in the psychodynamic tradition, which has different implications for 
the  practice. The theoretical foundation and the methodology that are advocated 
in this book are grounded, respectively, in social development theories of learning and 



42 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

in narrative–collaborative practice. They embody Michael White’s approach and 
 represent further synthesis as a result of further narrative collaboration (Stelter and 
Law, 2009, 2010).

There are two central foundations of the narrative approach:

1 a societal/cultural foundation, which consists of conversation as a reflective space 
and self-created meaning making and uses the metaphors of the coachee’s own 
culture (e.g. Turner, 1967; Myerhoff, 1982);

2 a learning foundation, in which learning functions as process of co-creation of 
knowledge – this is Vygotsky’s (1962) proximal development – and as a situation 
and part of a community of practice.

in many situations learning is integrated into the social process and becomes part of 
it. The knowledge generated in this way is a joint ‘product’, evolved from the social 
negotiations of the community of practice. Thus learning has an important influence 
on one’s self and identity development. Learning takes place when the individuals 
or groups are ‘disturbed’ from their routines in such a way that their habitual modes 
of thinking and understanding can no longer be applied to solving specific problems 
or challenges. Thus learning is also part of a self-created discovery.

To summarize what has been said about learning so far, learning is essentially a 
process that always starts from specific experiences in a concrete social and material 
environment. This process builds on two interrelated dimensions:

1 individual meaning making;
2 social interaction → co-creation of meaning.

in the narrative practice, dialogue between coach and coachee is an essential vehicle 
in helping the coachee to construct knowledge and meaning. According to Hounsell 
(1984), there are two kinds of dialogue:

1 surface approach: direct interpretation from dialogue into ‘text’ – as for example 
in learning by rote;

2 deep approach: further processing of the textual information to extract meaning 
from it.

Individual meaning making
Meaning is an important element in constructive–developmental theories. Against 
ebbinghaus’ assumptions discussed earlier, we argue that meaning has an important 
role in learning. Kegan (1982) regarded meaning making as the irreducible ‘primary 
human motion’; and indeed its activities take place at three levels of interaction:

1 at the physical level (or more accurately at the psycho-sensory level) – that is, at 
a perceptual and cognitive level – in that it consists of (1) grasping the concrete 
experience through the sensory perceptors; (2) processing the information inter-
nally through a set of sensory and neuro-networks; and (3) making sense of the 
perceived experience (i refer this as the internal transformation in the learning 
cycle in Figure 3.1);



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 43

2 at the social level, in that it requires others and their social interaction;
3 at the level of survival, in that it is something one lives for.

At the cognitive level, meaning, perception and processing are two essential  components 
in learning. For example, david Ausbel (1968) proposed that the ‘cognitive organiza-
tion’ and ‘processes of meaning’ are two key elements in his ‘meaningful reception 
learning theory’. According to this theory, the information we hold in our memories 
(cognitive structure) is stored in a hierarchical form: knowledge that is more general (or 
common knowledge) can be remembered more easily and stands at the top in this 
 representation, whereas more specific knowledge stands at the bottom and is difficult to 
remember. This structure forms the basis for learning, and new ideas are integrated 
within it. The specific and relevant ideas that the learner already has (Ausubel called 
these ‘anchoring ideas’) help learners to interpret meaning derived from their new 
 experiences/information by providing this meaning with a point of entry in the existing 
cognitive structure. it is possible to integrate the new knowledge into the existing struc-
ture at three levels (according to the assimilation theory of meaning processing):

1 Subordinate (subsumption): new ideas are integrated below the existing cognitive 
structures of the learner. one learns a new concept either by adding it to an exist-
ing structure (as a derivative) or by modifying/extending the existing structure 
(as a correlative).

2 Coordinate (combinatorial learning): This is the learning of information that 
does not relate specifically to pre-existing knowledge but aids learning in other 
general areas.

3 Superordinate: new information is learnt that is integrated above existing cognitive 
structures of the learner. This happens for example when one comes to know a 
phenomenon across many instances of it, then learns its name, thereby unifying all 
these occurrences.

our understanding of Ausbel’s meaningful reception learning theory can be improved 
by incorporating Bartlett’s (1932) notion of schema or packet of knowledge (hence 
the  so-called schema theory; see Anderson, Spiro and Anderson, 1978) and by 
 understanding how knowledge is represented there. A schema is ‘a data structure for 
representing the generic concepts stored in memory’ (Rumelhart, 1980). Schemata, 
like a set of variables, theories or procedures, form our mental model for a particular 
situation, place, person, or event (e.g. in terms of formal logic: Z  = X + Y, with an in-
stance: c = a + b). We access these schemata when trying to make sense of a situation by 
filling in gaps of what we are experiencing (instantiating the missing variables with the 
default values, for example c = a + ? – where ? = b). Therefore our mental model directs 
our learning and affects our performance (Johnson-Laird, 1983; norman, 1983). 
Formal logic can explain why one could infer the fact that a canary has wings, and 
therefore can fly, from the higher schema stored with the instance that a canary is a 
bird and that birds have wings and can fly (Collins and Quillian, 1969). The knowledge 
acquisition and representation are updated flexibly in order to accommodate new 
facts and exceptions – for example, ‘the ostrich is a bird, but it cannot fly’. The 
adaptive updating of schemata is referred in Anderson’s ACT (adaptive control of 
thought) model (Anderson et al., 1978).



44 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Learning must permanently alter our schemata, so that they continuously guide us 
towards managing new situations in the light of new experience. This is done through 
the following processes (see Rumelhart and norman, 1978; Rumelhart 1980; 
Vosniadou and Brewer, 1987):

•  accretion – which happens when new information is added (instantiated) into a 
schema, ‘filling gaps’ in our existing knowledge (e.g. Y = b);

•  tuning – a process of refinement; prior knowledge is modified with new 
information, and the schemata evolve to become more consistent with experience 
(Rumelhart and norman, 1978);

•  restructuring – or the creation of new schemata to replace or modify existing ones 
(Rumelhart and norman, 1981). This involves a degree of trial and error, in that 
we use an existing schema to help interpret the new situation. if the old schema is 
correct – in other words, if it fits in with the new experience – we are likely to 
incorporate it in our newly created one. But if it is incorrect we will replace it with 
our more up-to-date experience (what we have learnt).

Meaning is formed through our actual experiences and through the knowledge that 
the individual implicitly acquires from them in different life contexts. To make meaning, 
first one needs to make sense of an experience (Mezirow, 1990). According to our 
discussion so far, this is essentially a reflective process, which is influenced by individ-
uals’ assumptions, beliefs and values as well as by the culture (Cranton, 1996). We 
ascribe our actions, our experiences and interactions with others, and our life and work 
to specific values. These values evolve in the interplay between our acting, sensing, 
reflecting and telling specific stories – about ourselves and about the world we live in. 
These stories become meaningful. Through stories we begin to understand our own 
way of thinking and acting. Meaning is a central concept in a narrative approach.

Social learning theories

Like Vygotsky, Jean Lave and etienne Wenger (1991) locate learning within the social 
context of conversation – a co-participation they called ‘legitimate peripheral partici-
pation’ (LPP). Learning emerges from a kind of social practice that facilitates LPP. 
Wenger’s (1998) social learning theory regards social interactions (such as everyday 
conversations) as part of the human condition – namely processes in which we learn 
and become who we are (we acquire self-identity). Social learning theories regard 
learning as:

1 part of human nature (it is not a specific process that can be separated from 
everyday lives);

2 a form of meaning production, in other words an ability to discover, construct and 
negotiate new meanings (learning is not a mechanical process);

3 an emergent property that creates structures (Wenger regarded the ‘community of 
practice’ as part of ‘the social learning structure’);

4 social experience;
5 a process of transformation or identity development, insofar as it transforms 

 practices, communities and one’s identity;



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 45

6 a process related to the development of histories (or ‘trajectories of participation’, 
which do develop histories) – personal as well as communal (or collective);

7 a form of personal/social development and management of personal boundaries 
(we may have multiple forms of membership in relation to our participation and 
identity – for instance, one may be a mother, a teacher, a student, a friend… 
depending the situation and social context);

8 a part of social energy and power, namely as a process related to power relation-
ships, economies of meaning and membership in society (this resonates with 
Myerhoff’s (1982) notion of membership as a metaphor for self-identity, where 
life (in this case society) is regarded as a ‘club’; therefore one is free to choose 
and manage one’s membership or the membership of one’s own ‘life club’);

9 a part of our social engagement, and one of our opportunities to enter (or acquire 
membership in) particular communities of practice, which enable such 
engagement;

10 a part of our imagination – of one’s identity in a wider context;
11 a form of alignment;
12 an interplay between local and global contexts within and between which a 

community of practice operates.

According to Wenger (1998), social learning theory is in fact an embodiment of a 
number of interrelated theories:

1 Theories of social structure: these emphasize the community or the organizational 
structure, its norms and rules as the primary object of study; social patterns and 
structures should be accounted for because they determine the actions of individ-
uals who live in them.

2 Theories of situated experience: these value individuals’ experience and action – and 
the notion of agency – as the primary object of study. Studies of human– environmental 
interactions are a good example.

3 Theories of practice: these focus on the social activities that produce and repro-
duce the practice – the local culture – of a given community.

4 Theories of identity: these examine the formation of self-identity from social and 
cultural perspectives – for example, from the perspective of social categories such 
as age, class, ethnicity, gender and so on.

in addition to these four types, Wrenger (1998) adds:

•  Theories of power, which question the conceptualization of power rather than 
following the status quo.

•  Theories of subjectivity, which explain how subjective experience emerges from 
social interactions.

•  Theories of meaning, which examine the production of meanings and culture 
socially rather than philosophically – namely how meaning is produced through 
social participation and how it is owned by individuals in relation to power.

•  Theories of collectivity, which examine how groups or communities are formed 
and sustained. These groups range from local ones (families and villages) to global 
communities (states, the global network, or global movements). These theories 



46 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

also attempt to explain how social actions are produced and reproduced, for 
example as culture or social cohesion.

What kind of social experience constitutes learning? More specifically, ‘[l]earning can 
be defined as a realignment of experience and competence, which pulls the other. 
it is therefore impaired when the two are either too distant or too closely congruent 
to produce the necessary generative tension’ (Wenger, 1998: 227).

Wenger’s (2009) later work outlines four fundamental components of social 
learning in terms of social system and learning capability:

1 social learning spaces: meeting places that allow genuine conversation and active 
engagement among learners about their experience;

2 learning citizenship: a code of ethics of learning that ensures substantial commit-
ment from the participants, their willingness to participate rather than to be 
imposed upon;

3 social artists: people who provide inspiration to learners and address the ‘social 
dynamics’ at work in the complex system;

4 learning governance: learning is part of wider social systems that require some 
principles of ‘governance’ to guide the configuration of the social learning space 
and of its processes in order to optimize the learning capability of the system (the 
‘system’ being the community).

The components of learning presented above reflect a shift in the way we focus on 
learning. Understanding, meaning making and learning are situated in a social  context 
and emerge as a result of interpretation rather than developing a fixed cognitive structure 
(knowledge representation). Placing emphasis on them represents a shift in the learning 
paradigm, from the cognitive to the social. For educators, researchers, coaches and 
trainers, Wenger’s social learning theory raises new questions about learning, for example:

•  What kind of social interaction provides the optimal condition for learning?
•  What social context can best facilitate such interaction?
•  What are the forms and structure that enhance (rather than hinder) learning?

in mentoring (and in coaching), although the mentee is the one who benefits most from 
the mentoring process, the context that best facilitates their interaction is the whole social 
context in which both of them, mentor and mentee, act as expert performers in their 
own right within their own domain of knowledge; as a result, both benefit from such 
collaboration. Viewed from the social learning perspective, coaching or mentoring pro-
vide a form of LPP in which learning would take place (for both participants).

Applying Psychology of Learning to Develop a Coaching  
and Mentoring Framework

As we have seen from the review of some key learning theories in psychology, the 
learning process is a developmental process and the coach–coachee interaction is 
 crucial in the transformation that leads to development.



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 47

Three essential elements of learning theories emerge from the above literature 
review:

1 experience;
2 reflection;
3 meaning.

Reflective learning theories overlap with constructive development theories in terms of 
knowing how learners understand. Both kinds of theories emphasize the contribution 
of past experiences to present and future engagements. The self-agency for change 
anchors on an internal discourse – seeing the world through one’s reflective lens. it 
shapes the future direction with the intention of reframing one’s understanding.

The paradigm of coaching and mentoring as reviewed in Chapter 2 focused on the 
future (see Figure 2.1). However, coachees and mentees usually do have psychological 
barriers to moving forward, towards a future destination. The goal exists in the form 
of hopes and dreams in a ‘here and now’ state. The barriers may be based on unex-
amined beliefs – for example, ‘the future looks too foreign and threatening’. on the 
other hand, if the coaching condition that the coach or mentor created were too 
familiar, the coachees or mentees could not move forward, as they would be directed 
to dwell on the past: the learning wheel would ‘get stuck’. There is also the matter 
of the inevitable challenge of learning in a metaphorical comfort zone, where more 
elements are fixed and familiar, rather than in an uncomfortable or out-of-comfort 
zone, where more areas are fluid and ambiguity is commonplace. A very fixed per-
ception of the environment in which we operate helps us sustain and perhaps ‘freeze’ 
change and learning in exchange for security and safety; but a fluid environment is 
conducive to exploration and reflection, and safety is sacrificed for the sake of 
learning. The fixed world is a convenient perception, perhaps based on stereotypical 
thinking and past experience, and it leaves us without due appreciation for the distin-
guishing features of the environment we now operate in and for the players we are 
relating to. Thus coach and mentor need to create a transitional state – a condition 
that is neither too new nor too familiar for the learner to rise up to the occasion. See 
Figure 3.3 (also Figure 3.1).

There are problems with some of the early work in this field, which presupposes 
that homogeneity generates better learning relationships. People tend to seek rela-
tionships where there is a high rate of point-by-point correspondence; this facilitates 
easy empathy. Research into interpersonal attraction has shown that similarity in atti-
tudes, political beliefs and religiosity predicts attraction. Byrne and nelson (1965), 
Festinger, Schachter and Back (1950) and Allport (1954) described prejudice as a 
faulty and inflexible generalization, namely negative regard for another group. So, 
when we experience difference in our relationships with others – either at a personal 
level or in the environment of operation – we might negatively transfer an attitude 
directed at a group to one of its individual members. Further, the representation of 
difference as something generating discomfort – something to be ‘overcome’ rather 
than savoured, assimilated and desired – is prejudicial in itself.

The greater the differences we perceive between ourselves and others within our 
cultural context, the greater the perceived unfamiliarity. This results in discomfort 
within ourselves, which may cause negativity towards individuals who are different 



48 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

from us. This may include a range of attitudes, behaviours and characteristics. This is 
the leap many writers have taken when communicating the metaphorical comfort 
zones for learning in a cross-cultural paradigm. in coaching and mentoring, as in 
learning, this notion of belief needs to be questioned.

We hear that success in leadership is demonstrated by working successfully across 
traditional boundaries (working in new areas, with new clients, with new partners, in 
new ways) – in other words, through the ability to move regularly beyond boundaries 
and fixed positions or zones. Those who want to learn know that they will only be 
stretched if they engage with someone who has a different perspective – at least in one 
dimension; and the greater the number of different zones they bring to the ‘party’, 
the greater the number of new possibilities for learning. Thus if we map the learning 
wheel and the coaching and mentoring paradigm onto each other (i.e. if we overlay 
Figure 3.3 onto Figure 3.1), we have a dynamic coaching/mentoring model that is 
based on learning (Figure 3.4).

if we look from the framework described above, we can see the six substages of 
reflection described in the earlier section effectively overlapping the three realms of 
the learning wheel: past experience → meaning → new future.

The movement towards the new future destination becomes a resultant force (from 
the upward and forward transformations). This diagonal upward force defines the 
rolling mechanism. As some coaches would say, ‘let’s get the ball rolling’. Towards 
the end of this rolling or learning cycle or process, the coachees’ or mentees’ internal 
consciousness emerges, which is reflected in their behaviour – and this is equivalent to 
Schön’s notion of thinking in action.

in practice, the resulting progression from past experience to future aspiration may 
not be straightforward – either in the coaching and mentoring arena or in the real 
world. in fact to a lot of coachees and mentees, from junior managers to chief 

NEW future

Coaching / Mentoring /
Learning condition 

PAST experience 

Figure 3.3 Upward transformation in the coaching/mentoring/learning paradigm



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 49

 executives at the very top, the journey of living the dream could be extremely chal-
lenging. one of the barriers usually cited is the difficulty of adapting to a new culture. 
For some individuals, whether they are company directors or new immigrants, adapt-
ing to a new culture produces loss of meaning: somehow meaning is lost during this 
journey. The cause may be the lack of social references, or perhaps the challenge of a 
new experience. The phenomenon is well known from the new imigrants’ experience 
of  alienation. However, as far as chief executives and senior managers are concerned, 
it may be equally true that ‘it is lonely at the top’, as the saying goes. While these 
people may well have experienced how meanings are formed in their earlier journey 
of career and life, they may also have suffered from the experience of how those very 
meanings were challenged and lost. one of the challenges for coaches is to find a way 
to sustain and revitalize the coachees’ personal meaning at that juncture of their lives; 
for meaning making involves feeling and thinking. To understand someone’s meaning 
is not like understanding an idea or an abstract concept – something that can be 
bought off the shelf – but to experience it deeply and personally within the context 
of a shared culture.

Like good teachers, coaches and mentors would need to acquire skills in order to 
unpack the process of meaning making (for example, narrative approaches mentioned 
earlier and some of the exercises described in Chapters 7 and 8) and to help learners 
to form or rediscover their own meaning and take responsibility for it. Thus meaning 
making is an important intervening step in our equation of the internal transforma-
tion. Mapping this new substage onto our dynamic coaching/mentoring model in 
Figure 3.4, we have a more complete model (see Figure 3.5).

Understanding the above framework, we could appreciate how a concrete experi-
ence in coaching or mentoring could be transformed into a personal development and 
extended into broader commitments, meanings and purposes. To use Mentkowski’s 
apt phrase, ‘the distance, future, and past can seem immanent in the lived moment, 
making such moments pregnant with meaning’ (Mentkowski, 2000).

Concrete experience

Reflection

Abstract conception

Action 

External 
transformation: 
towards
behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

NEW future

PAST experience 

Coaching / Mentoring / Learning
condition 

Figure 3.4 Models matching: Learning wheel and coaching/mentoring paradigm



50 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

There may also be a precursor stage in the learning journey in a wider socio-cul-
tural context, where individuals need to be clear where they are and to feel secure in 
their own identity before they can explore new dimensions, stimulated by different 
perspectives and angles but not based on core empathy. Core empathy might be 
achieved by high similarity with one’s learning facilitator on the key defining ele-
ments of identity. in the course of developing a framework that is both universal and 
applicable across different cultures, we aim to unpack some of these key elements (as 
will happen in Chapter 6). The dynamic coaching/mentoring model discussed so far 
is grounded in the psychology of learning. We have found that it is very useful, as it 
could be readily applied to many coaching approaches such as cognitive behavioural 
therapy (CBT). Chapter 7 shows how CBT could embed the dynamic model in 
practice.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

i started this chapter by first describing the development of positive psychology as a 
philosophical foundation for coaching, then reviewing a range of learning theories 
and identifying their contribution to a universal framework for coaching and mentor-
ing. From reading this, you may find that some of these theories do not always support 
your practice and some areas may have more utility than theoretical insight. in this 
rapidly changing global market, the ability to learn quickly, in transition, outside of 
an established (and over-programmed) framework, is increasingly important. Working 
across different contexts with different people is a matter of positive curiosity, not of 
discomfort. Here discourse means open and objective dialogue, which challenges 
biased or distorted beliefs and assumptions (Mezirow, 1996).

Concrete experience

Reflection

Abstract conception

Action 

External 
transformation: 
towards
behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

Meaning NEW future

PAST experience 

Coaching / Mentoring / Learning
condition 

Figure 3.5 dynamic coaching/mentoring/learning with meaning as an intervening 
variable



 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring 51

our discussion of a positive psychology framework in coaching, mentoring and 
learning has also highlighted its departure from psychotherapy. We hope that readers 
will understand the reasons why certain psychotherapeutic approaches might not be 
applicable in coaching, mentoring and learning and why in these arenas there might 
be a risk of inappropriate application of psychotherapeutic approaches, in particular in 
the context of cross-cultural diversity.

Taylor, Marienau and Fiddler (2000) summarized the common features of the 
learning process outlined in various theories by describing it as a process of ‘resolving 
contradiction in dialectical fashion’. in this process, the following characteristics are 
identified:

•  increase in awareness;
•  new possibilities;
•  multiple perspectives;
•  new ways of viewing the world and oneself;
•  active responsibility for the world.

To sum up, here are the factors that underpin the learning process and are relevant 
for coaching, as they may have a significant impact upon the learner’s experience and 
upon the learning outcome:

•  action – doing (some social activities);
•  barrier (this may be transformed into a set of bridging tasks);
•  becoming;
•  change;
•  culture;
•  champion – a leader, a facilitator, coach or mentor (Wenger called this kind of 

person a ‘social artist’);
•  community – social system;
•  conversation;
•  discourse – open and objective dialogue, challenging biased or distorted beliefs 

and assumptions (meaning schemes, Mezirow, 1996);
•  ethics – learning citizenship;
•  governance – learning governance;
•  meaning and purpose;
•  practice;
•  space – social learning spaces;
•  self-identity – sense of belonging.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

definitions
Coaching Psychology, Coaching,  

Mentoring and Learning

Introduction

in Chapter 1 you have learnt about a generic working description of coaching and 
mentoring, as a developmental process of support offered to an individual, which 
results in action. i hope that this has been enough to get you started in your explora-
tion. Against the background of our discoveries so far, the present chapter provides 
a critical review of the definitions of coaching psychology, coaching, mentoring and 
learning, which come from different traditions. A succinct definition of a universal 
approach to the psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning will be given at 
the end.

The Meaning of Mentoring

The word ‘mentor’ comes from a character in Greek mythology portrayed in Homer’s 
Odyssey: Mentor. Mentor was actually Athena, the goddess of wisdom, in disguise, 
entrusted to educate Telemachus, the son of odysseus. in China, one would regard 
Confucius (孔子) as the first mentor (see Figure 4.1).

The traditional image of a mentor perpetrated the misconception that mentors are 
usually more mature and experienced people, who pass on their knowledge and skills 
to help their protégés up the corporate ladder. This notion fixes the roles into a 
learner–teacher hierarchy and counters our value of equality and the idea that the 
process is mentee-driven.

More recent historical literature reviews (e.g. Louis Antonine de Caracciolo’s 
Le véritable mentor ou L’éducation de la noblesse, or the work of Levinson, darrow, 
Klein, Levinson and McKee, 1978, mentioned in Chapter 3) seem to suggest that 
mentoring is closely related to the process of development (Garvey, 2011) in three 
main respects:

4



54 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  psychological (cognitive and emotional): for example, through self-awareness and 
emotional intelligence;

•  social: for example, through social development – both one’s own and that of the 
other (Sheehy, 1976, 1996; Levinson et al., 1978);

•  professional: for example, through career development (Clutterbuck, 2004).

Daloz (1999) spoke about ‘mentors as trusted guides, who understand theory 
of personal development and have experience in translating it into practice’. The 
European Mentoring and Coaching Council (EMCC) defines mentoring ‘as a 
developmental process which may involve a transfer of skill or knowledge from 
a more experienced to a less experienced person through learning dialogue and 
role modelling, and may also be a learning partnership between peers’ (EMCC, 
2011: 4). In consequence, by comparison with coaching, mentoring seems more 
concerned with a longer term personal/career development. Many of the single-
strand mentoring definitions derive from corporate settings, and phrases such as 
‘overseeing’ or ‘outside the line of management’ do not make them appropriate for 
the different context of mentoring. One may simply define mentoring as a social 
interaction between at least two people, in which the knowledge, experience and 
skills of one (or of both) are shared through a process that leads to psycho-social 
or professional development – in the form of personal growth, self-awareness and 
understanding (insight). This definition resonates with the recent practice of the 
East Mentoring Forum in the UK.

Figure 4.1 Athena and Confucius: the first mentors? Source: Athena: Stephane Mallarmé, Les 
dieux antiques, nouvelle mythologie illustrée (Paris, 1880). Confucius: © sinopics / istockphoto



 Definitions 55

Are there differences between coaching and mentoring?

Following these traditions, some practitioners (e.g. Parsloe, 1995) draw clear boundaries 
between coaching and mentoring. Viewed from this tradition, mentoring can be defined 
as a personal, development-centred approach, primarily embracing career issues – 
whereas personal development and coaching are more performance-centred. Mentoring 
becomes a long-term relationship, which continues through job changes, while co-
coaching (in which coaches coach each other) may be of a relatively short term and 
linked to a project or performance issue. in practice, coaching may take place in the 
line relationship in specific areas, but co-coaching is always outside the line and a man-
ager experienced in some aspect of improvement is undertaking the supervision.

Some practitioners and organizations do not draw a distinction between coaching 
and mentoring. For example, the Chartered institute of Personnel and development 
(CiPd) describes both coaching and mentoring as ‘helping behaviours’ that are used 
‘to support personal development over shorter and longer periods respectively’ 
(CiPd, 2012).

The eMCC regards both coaching and mentoring as ‘activities within the area 
of professional and personal development with focus on individuals and teams and 
relying on the client’s own resources to help them to see and test alternative ways for 
improvement of competence, decision making and enhancement of quality of life’. it 
considers both the coach and the mentor as ‘an expert in establishing a relationship 
with people in a series of conversations with the purpose of serving the clients to 
improve their performance or enhance their personal development or both, choosing 
their own goals and ways of doing it’ (eMCC, 2011: 3).

Pauline Willis (2005) suggests that coaching and mentoring are similar activities 
and processes. Coaches and mentors often share the same skills and practices. in this 
book i advocate the overlapping and interchanging nature of a coaching–mentoring 
continuum, not only because it is grounded in a common psychology of learning, but 
also, and more importantly, because it is more fluid, flexible and adaptable to an indi-
vidual’s changing needs over time across contexts and cultures.

Definition of Coaching

The term ‘coach’ has a double meaning in english. As a person, a coach is usually 
understood to be an instructor or a trainer in sport. This is one of the reasons why 
coaching psychology has its earlier roots in sport psychology. However, coach also 
literally means ‘carriage’ – a vehicle to transport people from A to B. in the past, a 
coach used to be a horse-drawn carriage (see Figure 4.2). nowadays we have the image 
of a modern vehicle, which takes us on a journey from where we are now to where we 
wish to be (destination). This play on words (the double meaning of ‘coach’) was first 
used in William Thackeray’s Pendennis in 1849 – as Garvey (2011: 12) observes in the 
course of drawing a history of coaching.

This actually resonates with the metaphor i use for coaching – which is that of 
a journey. Thus the role of a ‘coach’ is to act as a vehicle that carries (transports) 
the coachees from where they are (here and now) to where they aspire to be (in the 
future). The historical perception mentioned earlier, which has defined mentoring, 



56 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

also helped shape the early definitions of coaching. Coaching has been defined by 
a number of scholars and practitioners as the art of facilitating the performance, 
learning and development of another (Downey, 1999); one is directly concerned 
with the improvement of the coachees’ performance and the development of their 
skills. This may be carried out in the form of a conversation, tutoring or instruction 
(Parsloe, 1995).

The above resonates with the classic definition mostly spoken about by coaches, 
coined from Timothy Gallwey in John Whitmore’s (2002: 8) Coaching for Performance: 
‘Coaching is unlocking a person’s potential to maximize their own performance. It is 
helping them to learn rather than teaching them.’

My colleague Dr Christian van Nieuwerburgh (2012: 17, cited in Coaching in 
Education Study Guide) defines coaching thus:

A one-to-one conversation focused on the enhancement of learning and development 
through increasing self-awareness and a sense of personal responsibility where the coach 
facilitates the self-directed learning of the coachee through questioning, active listening, 
and appropriate challenge in a supportive and encouraging climate.

To summarize, coaching activities have the following characteristics (Law, 2002):

•  They unlock people’s potential to maximize their own performance.
•  They help people to learn rather than teaching them (they have a facilitation 

function).
•  From an instructional point of view, they are directly concerned with the immediate 

improvement of performance and the development of skills through a form of 
tutoring or instruction.

•  They enhance performance in the domains of work and personal life, and this 
is  underpinned by models of coaching grounded in established psychological 
approaches.

Each professional coaching body has its own definition, too. According to the 
International Coach Federation (ICF), coaching is a ‘partnering with clients in a 
thought-provoking and creative process that inspires them to maximize their personal 
and professional potential’ (ICF, 2013). Similarly, the EMCC describes coaching as a 
‘partnering with clients in a thought-provoking and creative process that inspires 
them to maximize their personal and professional potential’ (EMCC, 2011: 5) and 
claims that this is a process ‘facilitating the client’s learning process by using 

Figure 4.2 A Coach?



 Definitions 57

professional methods and techniques to help the client to improve what is obstructive 
and nurture what is effective, in order to reach the client’s goals’ (p. 3).

The Association for Coaching (AC) provides a comprehensive range of definitions 
for coaching in terms of the following domains (AC, 2012):

•  Personal/Life: ‘A collaborative, solution-focused, results-orientated and systematic 
process in which the coach facilitates the enhancement of work performance, life 
experience, self-directed learning and personal growth of the coachee’ (citing the 
definition by Anthony Grant in Australia).

•  executive: ‘personal coaching […] is specifically focused at senior management 
level, where there is an expectation for the coach to feel as comfortable exploring 
business related topics, as personal development topics with the client in order to 
improve their personal performance.’

•  Corporate/Business: ‘the specific remit of a corporate coach is to focus on support-
ing an employee, either as an individual, as part of a team and/or organization to 
achieve [sic] improved business performance and operational effectiveness.’

•  Speciality/niche: ‘the coach is expert in addressing one particular aspect of a 
 person’s life e.g. stress, career, or the coach is focused on enhancing a particular 
section of the population e.g. doctors, youths.’

•  Group: ‘the coach is working with a number of individuals either to achieve a 
common goal within the group, or create an environment where individuals can 
co-coach each other.’

As mentioned in Chapter 2, there are diverse styles of coaching and mentoring, rang-
ing from the direct instructional approach to non-directive, facilitative techniques. 
There is no agreement on which is the best approach. it usually depends on the 
individual client, coach or mentor, and the contextual situation the stakeholders bring 
into the space of engagement. However, there is a common agreement among coaches 
and mentors that they work with their clients to help them to discover and maximize 
their strengths for their own benefit and/or that of their organizations. Typical state-
ments from coaches and mentors include:

[…] the intention of helping people to achieve a breakthrough in their lives and then 
helping them beyond that breakthrough. (Breakthrough and Beyond Ltd., participant in 
the workshop)

[… to help] people to communicate better, to help them understand other people’s 
 perceptions, and indeed their own too, and to become much more effective in everything 
that they do. The ultimate aim is to enable organizations to be more efficient, to increase 
their retention of good staff and to be profitable. However the programmes are also about 
personal development, so that participants can take away learning and experiences that 
will help them in their private, as well as their working lives … it seeks to make learning 
fun to enable individuals to take learning back to their work and lives […] develop a person’s 
capacity to learn and grow in such a way that they continue learning long after a course 
ends. (Learning to inspire Ltd., participant in the workshop)

The above observations represent a diverse spectrum of approaches, ranging from 
facilitation at one end to instructional approaches at the other. According to the 



58 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Special Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP) survey, the facilitation style is the 
preferred approach, being favoured by more than 70 per cent (see Figure 4.3). in a 
universal approach, there should be in-built sustainability and renewal. Potentially, 
everyone can be a coach to support others who are engaging in the process.

Definition of Learning

in this book it is argued that coaching and mentoring should be anchored in the psy-
chology of learning; and the book adopts Marcy driscoll’s definition, as she has suc-
cessfully brought together different strands of psychology and used them for practice 
by reflecting on her accumulated knowledge and years of experience in teaching 
undergraduates and new graduates in education.

According to driscoll, learning is a persisting ‘change in performance or performance 
potential that results from experience and interaction within the world’ (2005: 9; 
emphasis added). According to this definition, learners take the input from their 
ex perience and produce a permanent change in their performance. While the defini-
tion also implies that the focus should not always be on short-term, readily measured 
performance improvements, performance does matter and needs to be a point of 
focus in any development process, at least for some of the time.

A key question is: what are the exact factors that cause the permanent change? 
From Chapter 3, you have learnt that this is a complex process and involves many 
factors. Learning theories aim to unpack some of those factors. They usually look at 
the concept of learning through four areas (Figure 4.4):

1 input: what (and who) is needed for the process of learning to occur? Answer: 
some action (doing some social activities); a facilitator; the presence of barriers 
(where the facilitator needs to design a set of bridging tasks to help the learner to 
overcome them); and a code of ethics (learning contract).

2 Means: how does it occur? Answer: in the form of a conversation; in space (which 
is a social learning space); by developing a community (social system) and a 
learning culture; through governance and practice.

Facilitation 

Instruction

Figure 4.3 Facilitation versus instructional approaches in coaching



 Definitions 59

3 output: what are activities generated from the learning process? Answer: the 
performance of the learnt task.

4 outcome: what changes take place? Answer: the co-creation of meaning; a sense 
of purpose and self-identity (sense of belonging).

Applying the definition of learning to instructing,  
coaching and mentoring

Applying the psychology of learning to the definition of instruction, Marcy driscoll 
connects learning theories to instruction for trainers (which has a similar implication 
for teachers, coaches and mentors). She defines instruction as ‘any deliberate arrange-
ment of events to facilitate a learner’s acquisition of some goal’ (2005: 23; emphasis 
added).

Definition of personal strength: contribution from positive psychology
According to Linley and Harrington (2005: 13), positive psychology is ‘[t]he scientific 
study of optimal functioning, focusing on aspects of the human condition that lead to 
happiness, fulfilment, and flourishing’; they also lead to strength, construed as ‘[a] 
natural capacity for behaving, thinking, or feeling in a way that allows optimal func-
tioning and performance in the pursuit of valued outcomes’.

From these two definitions, coaches and mentors can expect that understanding 
more about psychology will help coachees and mentees achieve their optimal func-
tioning and performance in the pursuit of valued outcomes. Let’s see how this com-
pares with the definition of coaching psychology.

Definition of Coaching Psychology

Coaching psychology aims to enhance well-being and performance in the domains of 
personal life and work with normal, non-clinical populations, and it is underpinned by 
models of coaching grounded in established adult learning or psychological approaches 
(Grant and Palmer, 2002: 8; emphasis added).

note that the above definition emphasizes the application of psychology to coach-
ing for normal, non-clinical populations only. it brackets out the potential population 
of clients who may benefit from coaching. Moreover, the line to draw between clinical 
and non-clinical within the continuum of a normally distributed population is both 
arbitrary and difficult. it is also probable that clients who seek a coaching intervention 
may suffer from psychological problems such as stress, trauma and depression. it is 
argued that coaches have a duty of care in their practices if their clients enter the 
 consultation with clinical problems (Spence, Cavanagh, and Grant, 2006).

While Grant and Palmer’s definition was initially adopted by the Coaching 
Psychology Forum in May 2002, the above issues were discussed in a number of 

Input Means Output Outcome 

Figure 4.4 defining a learning process



60 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

meetings as the Forum evolved into the established Special Group in Coaching 
Psychology. it was decided that the phrase ‘normal, non-clinical’ be deleted from the 
definition, in order to make it more inclusive. Thus coaching psychology is defined as 
being ‘for enhancing well-being and performance in personal life and work domains 
underpinned by models of coaching grounded in established adult learning or 
psychological approaches’ (Palmer and Whybrow, 2006: 8).

More recently, in 2006, the SGCP definition has removed the term ‘adult’, as 
coaching psychology can also be applicable to children’s learning (e.g. to parenting). 
Thus coaching psychology is for enhancing well-being and performance in personal 
life and work domains, being underpinned by models of coaching grounded in 
established psychological approaches.

Definition of Intercultural Coaching Psychology

As mentioned in the introduction, valuing diversity and applying coaching across cul-
tures are essential criteria in successful coaching in the modern global communities – 
be it in international business or in a multicultural society. We thus pay particular 
attention to redefining coaching psychology in a way that is applicable across 
cultures.

intercultural coaching psychology enhances the well-being and the performance of 
individuals from different cultural backgrounds or with dual cultural heritage in their 
personal life and work. Cross-cultural coaching is subtly different from intercultural 
coaching. it is a form of coaching individuals who come from different countries, and 
hence have different cultures. We advocate in this chapter that it would be useful for 
the psychological approaches that underpin both forms of coaching to be based 
on cultural anthropology. However, the traditional emphasis on culture as relating 
primarily to geographical and ethnic variation is not sufficient in a universal model 
that operates in an increasingly complex, mixed and hybrid world. nowadays work 
meets home life, people meet each other, workers with a different ethos work together, 
partnership between new types of organization and inter-community collaboration in 
new ways are key to our sustainability. The notion of culture and context need to be 
fluid enough to encompass the changing micro- and macro-worlds we construct and 
move between every day.

While our definition is very similar to that adopted by the SGCP within the main-
stream, it is more in line with Philippe Rosinski’s (2003) proposal that, by integrating 
a cultural dimension into coaching, we can help our coachees access more of their 
potential to achieve meaningful outcomes.

Proposal for a Universal Integrative Framework  
for Coaching Psychology

From the many definitions put forward by many scholars in the field and from our 
understanding of the psychological theories of learning, a universal integrative frame-
work (UiF) was proposed in the first edition. The framework is ‘underpinned by 
psychological learning theory in a process that is developmental, brings about change 



 Definitions 61

and is culturally mindful. it enables flexibility and fluidity in its practice, to extend 
beyond boundaries’ (Law, ireland and Hussain, 2007: 55).

To this i should add that the ‘change’ should be relatively permanent and sustain-
able across the following developmental areas:

•  personal: self-awareness and mindfulness;
•   social: awareness of social interaction; managing communication, feedback and 

relationships;
•  cultural: appreciation of a cultural environment;
•   professional: including learning, supervision and continuous professional 

development (CPd).

The above four domains will be expanded further in Chapter 6.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

This chapter has provided a list of concrete definitions of the key concepts. The theoret-
ical grounding of coaching, mentoring and learning, and their scientific credentials, have 
been emphasized. However, readers should be mindful not to subscribe to any specific, 
narrow approach at the expense of the art of coaching, which is not over-formalized and 
therefore offers wide possibilities for learning. As a result, a universal integrative frame-
work (UiF) has been proposed – a process that takes people beyond organizational, 
community and self-imposed boundaries into a new domain. it embodies the spirit of 
coaching – that is, through coaching, people are moved (transported) out of their com-
fort zone (their familiar knowledge and known experience) into a new territory of 
learning (Vygotsky called this the zone of proximal development). Such exposure would 
increase understanding of the multiple dynamics of any situation and of a complex 
world. Let’s explore this further as our journey unfolds.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Leadership and organizational 
Coaching and Mentoring

Becoming a Learning Organization  
and Learning Community

Introduction

in Chapter 3 you have acquired some knowledge about the theories of learning and 
have become aware of recent developments in positive psychology and their use as a 
foundation for coaching. Coaching or mentoring programmes are a natural partner of 
improvement within a learning organization. it works across hierarchies. it extends 
beyond a relationship of two people, to teams. According to our definition in Chapter 
4, coaching is a process that takes people beyond organizational, community and 
self-imposed boundaries, into a new domain. in this chapter you will continue to 
explore this territory within the organizational context.

Through a couple of case studies, this chapter builds a case for developing a learning 
organization via introducing a coaching and mentoring agenda and explains its role in 
the current economic climate. You will learn how an organization can become a 
learning organization by implementing coaching and mentoring programmes. The 
term ‘organization’ has been expanded to include communities, which reflect diverse 
practices. You will see why mentoring and coaching are necessary; what their issues 
and benefits are; and how to start a coaching or a mentoring programme within your 
organization.

This chapter will also examine learning and change in an organization and com-
munity context, the role of structures, technology, engagement and collaboration, 
perceptions of values and attitudes, and empowerment – all in their contribution to 
learning community models; you shall also see how coaching and mentoring can 
support change and how they work within an improvement framework. The chapter 
will show how coaching and mentoring can benefit organizations; it will bring some 
specific examples, followed by practical guidance on setting up a coaching or mentor-
ing process.

5



64 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Challenges of the Changing World

Today every organization is seeking to improve its efficiency in response to the 
changing environment. Boards of directors are looking at the continuous improve-
ment and reorganization brief; governments regularly commission experts to assess 
strategies for their relevance in the changing context. organizations are motivated to 
change to gain competitive advantage, to save money and resources, to increase 
quality and to incorporate new working practices. new and renewed alliances are the 
key to timely and efficient deliverables in a bigger marketplace. outsourcing and 
partnering in areas where organizations are not competitive make economic sense. 
Collaborations work well when there is mutual trust and respect, where power is 
 perceived to be equally distributed and ways of working are transparent. Rarely is 
a  complaint investigated that does not change something or some thinking for 
someone. Many of those complaints fall at the edge of someone’s competence, border 
multiple agency responsibilities, lie between various department functions or are the 
result of the impact of someone’s limited self-belief. errors also occur when there is 
no continuity, or memory of what has gone before, to inform what happens next. 
With virtual social networking systems, more people have access to information; 
however, that does not automatically transfer into the knowledge to bring about 
change. The speed of change, the increasing complexity of the environment, the 
changing marketplace and the role of  evolving technology, and the increased expec-
tations and demands of stakeholders all mean that standing still is not an option. in 
order to survive in a world of upheaval, the organization must continue to learn 
(Vaill, 1996); and leaders must adopt a new model of practice in this so-called 
connective era where the connections between diverse concepts and different people 
within the changing environment are more important than geopolitical boundaries 
(Lipman-Blumen, 1996). The following examples illustrate what can happen when 
organizations box themselves in through their past values and do not learn to change.

enron: unethical corporate leadership culture

enron Corporation, formed in 1985, was the seventh largest American company in 
the Fortune 500 in 2001, with a stock market value of $35 billion. However, its 
 leadership and management practices were poor and sometimes unethical. For in-
stance, the ‘seagull management’ approaches were in common practice throughout 
the organization (Weissman, 2008). in other words, the managers made a lot of noise, 
aggressively making sales to the customers, and then they moved on when problems 
arose. The apparent success of the company was just an illusion created through 
manipulative devices and contrivances, using dishonest accounting and auditing prac-
tice. different professions (consultants and auditors) were combined within the same 
company; thus the auditors’ obligation of public disclosure was compromised. enron 
announced bankruptcy and its chief executives went on trial in January 2006.

Kodak: hard to shift culture

eastman Kodak, founded by George eastman in 1881, is an American multina-
tional  company for photographic imaging equipment and film products. during 



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 65

the  twentieth century the company held a dominant market share (90 per cent) of 
 photographic film sales in the US. owing to the technological development of digital 
camera in the late 1990s, the sale of photographic film declined gradually. ironically, 
although Kodak invested in the first digital camera in 1975, it was slow to respond to 
the changing technological environment and reluctant to shift its business focus 
towards digital technology. The attempt to generate revenues through aggressive 
patent litigation did not help to save the company: Kodak eventually filed for 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 2012. in contrast, its competitor Fujifilm has 
successfully shifted to digital production and diversified its products.

Learning from case studies

The above stories illustrate the importance of leadership in the rapidly changing 
 environment. While the two companies had a very different ethos, both exemplify 
the culture that is hardest to shift: the top-down, hierarchical culture, with ritualistic 
observances of their organizational values. While enron’s unethical accounting and 
management practice was doomed to fail from the very beginning, Kodak’s failure to 
embrace the new digital technological revolution was due to a mistaken belief steeped 
in tradition and heritage. The nostalgic value of the so-called ‘Kodak moment’ – 
which once represented the cornerstone of the company’s success – became the 
greatest barrier against change. it generated fear that the new technology might kill 
off the company’s traditional film-based photographic market (which was perceived as 
the company’s ‘cash cow’). A succession of chief executives were not able to shift the 
core value of the organization.

Why is it that some organizations have winning cultures, whereas others just have 
 eye-rolling value statements?
Research shows that a strong organizational culture leads to superior performance 
across a range of measures, whether these are to do with employee engagement, 
brand or bottom line; so at some point most organizations will have taken some form 
of culture initiative. However, many fail to deliver much beyond a value statement 
that never seems to come to life. only organizations that define values that are mean-
ingful to their people and manage to translate them into every aspect of life at work 
reap the reward.

To summarize, here are the lessons learnt from the case studies:

1 Past successes often become a barrier against change, leading to future failure.
2 Values, beliefs and attitudes that guide organization and community development 

need to be owned and constantly changing.
3 Customers want quality at affordable prices, not tradition.
4 Loyalty was not a criterion for purchase.
5 Companies need to recognize change in their customers and their context that 

influences their buying behaviour.
6 Mutual trust within the senior management team is not enough for successful pur-

poseful engagement.
7 ethical accounting and management practices need to be embedded as part of the 

organizational culture.



66 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

 8  organizations’ ability to gain feedback from customers/users, learn and change 
is important for their survival.

 9  The benefits of an organization have to be relevant to all stakeholders, to achieve 
a perceived balance of power, to facilitate ownership and to encourage engage-
ment on the part of stakeholders.

10  in the traditional leadership and managerial conception, a lot of activities within 
an organization are not value-added. This results in low productivity. To improve 
the performance of an organization, a new working or production philosophy 
needs to be developed. Lauri Koskela (1992) noted that in the manufacturing 
industry very little is known about how this new kind of philosophy works.

11  This new way of working requires a shift in mindset and practices at all levels 
within the organization. Communications and collaborations between teams 
need to be different, and managers need to be leaders, as the whole organization 
becomes more flexible in the way it works.

We are not always good at recognizing that it is time to change. As the environment 
changes, organizations’ missions can fall out of step in terms of goals, behaviour and 
language. They can cease to be legally, ethically or technologically compliant and lose 
touch with good practice. organizations can become fixated on semi-permanent 
frameworks of missions, values and protocols and stay hooked well beyond their sell-
by date.

Getting started

The starting point in developing any learning organization is to have a thorough 
understanding and to make an honest review of the organization’s business, its 
market- place, customers, competitors and suppliers (Verity, 2006). There are various 
 traditional management tools that can help with organizational analysis, such as 
balance scorecards, SWoT, PeSTeL, and the latest developments in cultural social 
intelligence (CSi), in the universal integrated framework described in the next chapter. 
Let’s first establish what a competent organization should look like; how learning, 
through coaching and mentoring, can help an organization become a competent one; 
and how coaching and mentoring may be introduced into an organization as an 
initiative to help managers and teams to increase their professional competence, 
learning capacity, efficiency and effectiveness.

A Learning Organization Is a Competent Organization

What does a competent organization look like? From the literature review and the 
observation of case studies, a competent organization tends to have the following 
characteristics:

•  a sense of direction;
•  an ethical value;
•  a long-term vision;
•  short-term objectives;



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 67

•  resourcefulness;
•  the ability to cope with a changing environment;
•  satisfied stakeholders.

These elements are usually captured in the organization’s strategy – for example, large 
organizations have five-year business plans, and sales departments have a strategic 
marketing plan. even small and medium-sized companies require business plans 
incorporating the above strategies if they are to remain competitive. The characteris-
tics are succinctly captured in Johnson and Scholes’ definition:

Strategy is the direction and scope of an organization over the long term, which achieves 
advantage for the organization through its configuration of resources within a changing 
environment, to meet the needs of markets and to fulfil stakeholder expectations. (1999: 
10; emphasis added)

For a comprehensive overview of the psychology of strategic management within the 
context of competent organizations, see Hodgkinson and Sparrow (2002). For an 
organization to formulate its strategy and implement it through strategic management, 
at least three sets of issues should arise:

1 Analysis: leads to an understanding of the organization, its strategic position, 
 environment, resources, values and objectives.

2 Choice: formulates courses of action and selects the optimal ones.
3 implementation: translates the strategy into action via resource planning, organi-

zation design and people management.

As in coaching and mentoring, much of the literature and practices in knowledge 
management and organizational learning are simply repackaging the established tools 
and techniques of the disciplines of psychology and management. This book seeks to 
translate these fragmented concepts and ‘hypes’ into a coherent body of actionable 
knowledge that is applicable both to individuals and organizations. By ‘actionable 
knowledge’ (a phrase borrowed from Argyris, 1999), i mean the practical knowledge 
that is useful to practising coaches and at the same time grounded in a well-researched, 
evidence-based framework.

Traditionally, there are three schools of thought in organizational learning. These 
are based on the following sets of imperatives:

1 Reason Regard the strategic management (analysis–choice–implementation) as a 
rational process. Assume that the objectives of the action plan are achievable as 
long as its rationale is communicated to and understood by the stakeholders.

2 Evolution View organizational behaviour as too complex to be understood ration-
ally. organizations evolve through trial and error, learning by doing. Successful 
strategies emerge over time, as if the organization had its own memories and 
remembered the lessons learnt.

3 Process Take the middle ground. The strategic frameworks and processes can be 
rationally designed, but made flexible – adaptable to change and to learning from 
previous mistakes.



68 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

There are various definitions and characteristics of organizational learning and of the 
learning organization. A learning organization seems to have a process that enables it to:

•  learn from mistakes over time; elicit adaptive behaviour; detect and correct error; 
take collective thinking in action, so-called organizational theory in use or theory 
in action (Cyert and March, 1963; Argyris, 1977; Argyris and Schön, 1978). 
These may be achieved by individuals or groups of individuals at the organiza-
tional level (Cangelosi and dill, 1965);

•  improve action and outcome through better knowledge and understanding, by 
making both attitudinal and behavioural changes (duncan and Weiss, 1979; Fiol 
and Lyles, 1985);

•  encode inferences from history into routines that guide current behaviour through 
systematic rules and procedures (Levitt and March 1988);

•  share insight, knowledge and mental models that build on past knowledge and 
memory (Strata, 1989);

•  learn and encourage learning in its people (Handy, 1989);
•  synthesize a diverse set of assumptions or beliefs into a commonly shared under-

standing (Ginsberg, 1990);
•  expand the organizational capacity to create desirable outcome as a result of people 

learning together continuously (Senge, 1990);
•  acquire useful knowledge and change behaviour (Huber, 1991);
•  create new knowledge, make tacit knowledge explicit, disseminate it throughout 

the organization, and embody it into new technologies, products and services 
(output) (nonaka, 1991);

•  elicit error-free operation (organizational behaviour reflects ‘collective minds’) 
and the so-called ‘heedful interrelation’ (an organization behaves like an intelli-
gent machine) (Weick and Roberts, 1993);

•  create, acquire and transfer knowledge, modify its own behaviour to reflect new 
knowledge and insight; see the world in a new light; learn from its own experience 
and history and from the experience and best practice of others (Garvin, 1993).

To sum up, a learning organization is an organization that has processes in place to 
facilitate organizational learning – which is very similar to our definition of the 
learning process. organizational learning consists of:

•  input – experience;
•  process – routines and procedures that allow people continuously to learn (e.g. staff 

competencies framework, personnel training and development plans, and investors in 
people initiative); to transform experience into new knowledge, insight and under-
standing; to share and disseminate that knowledge (e.g. interest groups, user forums 
and communication strategies); to accumulate it into history (e.g. archives); and a 
mechanism to detect new knowledge, correct errors, change behaviour on the basis of 
the input experience (e.g. performance management, feedback loop and evaluation);

•  output – changed behaviour, new technologies, products and services, and history 
(from accumulated experience);

•  outcome – shared understanding and values, expanded capacity; improved com-
petencies, action, products/services and customer satisfaction.



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 69

Learning organizations are different from the traditional resourced-based organiza-
tions in terms of the following task characteristics (Senge, 1990; Arvedson, 1993):

•  goal setting – shared visions instead of vision from the top;
•  thinking and doing – systemic (thinking and doing at all levels) rather than atom-

istic (the top thinks, the managers act);
•  conflict resolution – setting up dialogue, integrating diverse opinions, sharing 

understanding rather than mediating politically, through power relationship.

Coaching Psychology and Organization Memories

on 19 december 2006, at the 2nd national Coaching Psychology Conference, in a 
speech on ‘applying existential psychology in a coaching psychology practice’, ernesto 
Spinelli criticized the over-emphasis on placing the future under focus in coaching 
philosophy. He pointed out that such an approach in coaching neglects both the past 
and the present, as if they did not exist. indeed both the past and the future are 
important factors that make up our present moment of engagement for change. 
organizations that attempt to ‘get it right first time’ by over-utilizing future tech-
nology such as electronic communications and storage run the risk of forgetting their 
past and falling into organizational dementia, where vital knowledge becomes inac-
cessible (see the case study of a high technology firm in Blackler, Crump and 
Mcdonald, 1999).

The organization’s memory, with its embodiment of a collective sense of history 
and shared values, is key to success and to the delivery of high performance. The first 
question is: What kind of knowledge should employees share within an organization? 
Five types of knowledge that need to be shared among members of a team can be 
identified from our literature review:

•  dictionary knowledge (declarative knowledge): definitions and classifications of 
objects and events; statements that declare what should be done (Sackmann, 
1991, 1992; Zack, 1999);

•  recipe knowledge (procedure/process knowledge): task-specific procedures that 
describe how a specific task should be done, allowing team members to follow the 
instructions with a shared expectation of the outcome (Sackmann, 1991, 1992; 
Cannon-Bowers and Salas, 1993; Zack, 1999);

•  directory knowledge: task-related descriptions of how tasks are actually carried 
out. This kind of knowledge is usually in the public domain and is commonly pos-
sessed by all the existing members, which may place new members in a disadvan-
taged position (Sackmann, 1991, 1992; Rentsch and Hall, 1994);

•  people knowledge: the understanding of each other’s competencies within the 
team, so that members can adapt their behaviour to complement or compensate 
for others’ strengths and weaknesses accordingly. in working as a team or within 
an organization, one needs to learn who knows what (Moreland, 2000);

•  axiomatic knowledge (causal knowledge): knowledge of fundamental attitudes, 
beliefs and values; these are shared organizational values and team members’ 
 attitudes and beliefs, which enable the team to reach consensus effectively and 



70 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

efficiently. This kind of knowledge explains why people do certain things or behave 
in certain ways. it shapes and defines an organization’s culture (Sackmann, 1991, 
1992; Zack, 1999; Mohammed, Klimoski and Rentsch, 2000).

The above types of knowledge are not static entities. They flow between people and 
process and transform the organization into an effective and functioning one. For an 
organization to direct employees to reach consensus effectively and efficiently, it is 
important to translate implicit axiomatic knowledge into explicitly shared values in 
the form of basic ground rules, ethics, codes and conducts. Figure 5.1 shows how 
knowledge flows within the organization.

of course, knowledge would not flow of its own accord. it requires an active 
and coordinated effort of the stakeholders to ensure that new knowledge is acquired 
(e.g. through coaching, consultancy, training and development) and that existing 
knowledge is maintained (e.g. through inventories and storages), as well as diffused 
and transferred to the new employees (e.g. through induction training and mentor-
ing). These effectively form three clusters: knowledge acquisition and creation; 
knowledge capture and storage; and knowledge diffusion and transfer (Staples, 
Greenaway and McKeen, 2001). The process of knowledge management is consistent 
with our input–process–output/outcome system.

Learning Organization and Psychology of Learning

Within an organization, knowledge exchange requires interaction between people 
and business information processes. in its simplest form, this interaction requires 
at  least two actors – whether the interaction consists in communications from one 
person to another or in learning from company handbooks or procedures, which 
were developed by another person. There are many different ways in which knowledge 

Dictionary 
knowledge

Recipe 
knowledge

Directory 
knowledge

Axiomatic
knowledge:
Values and
belief

Codes and
ethics

People knowledge

Figure 5.1 Knowledge flows within the organization



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 71

is transferred. According to a Japanese concept of knowledge creation, the approaches 
can be classified into four types of organizational competence (nonaka, 1991; nonaka, 
Takeuchi and Umemoto, 1996):

•  Socialization People learn from each other. Within an organization tacit knowledge 
is directly transferred from individual to individual, through observation and 
hands-on experience (from tacit to tacit).

•  Combination (integration) Several separate pieces of explicit knowledge are 
integrated together into a coherent whole: a set of knowledge and organizational 
procedures, rules and processes can be combined to form a larger complex system 
(from explicit to explicit).

•  Articulation People translate tacit knowledge, giving it an explicit form, and com-
municate through the organization (from tacit to explicit).

•  Internalization The declared knowledge, having been communicated, is shared; 
over time it is internalized in the minds of employees and becomes their own tacit 
knowledge (from explicit to tacit).

These transfers or flows can be summarized in a knowledge transfer matrix, as shown 
in Table 5.1.

The organization’s learning process described by nonaka (1991) can be mapped 
onto our learning cycle as follows:

•  from concrete experience to abstract conception, via internal reflection (internal-
ization, from explicit to tacit, process to people transformation);

•  from reflection/abstract conception to action (articulation, from tacit to explicit, 
people to process communication).

organization learning in the form described above can be expressed as a network of 
individual learning cycles – via people to people (socialization), people translating 
their knowledge into business process (articulation) and vice versa (learning from pro-
cedures and process, internalization); and the process can be multiplied into a system 
(combination), and become a learning organization as a whole. Figure 5.2 shows a 
simplified version of a knowledge network. The network consists of two or more 
learning cycles where person A can learn from persons B, … x and/or from business 
processes 1, 2, … n.

The characteristic of the above network model is consistent with cooperative inquiry 
(Heron, 1981a, 1981b; Reason and Rowan, 1981; Reason, 1988); with naturalistic 

Table 5.1 Knowledge transfer matrix

Knowledge Implicit/Tacit – in people Explicit – in process

implicit/Tacit – in 
people

Socialization  
(people – people)

Articulation  
(people – process)

explicit – in  
process

Internalization 
(process – people)

Combination/integration 
(process – process)



72 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

or human inquiry (Lincoln and Guba, 1984; Bell and Hardiman, 1989); and, more 
recently, with the Agile way of working in teams and project management. in this con-
text, coaching can facilitate knowledge flow within teams and within an organization. 
The role of a coach here becomes similar to that of a researcher whose objective is to 
conduct an enquiry into knowledge transfer processes.

While the embedding of the learning cycle into a coaching framework for 
improving organizational performance might seem to be novel at its first edition, its 
application to knowledge acquisition and training is certainly not new. As early as 
1988, Jill Bell from JB Associates and Bob Hardiman from iBM UK ran a  four-day 
experiential training course entitled ‘The Human Side of Knowledge engineering’ 
in the USA, Germany, Singapore and Brazil, using the human inquiry approach (Bell 
and Hardiman, 1989). They called their method ‘naturalistic knowledge engi-
neering’ (nKe). This book has brought the principles of nKe up to date in the 
context of organizational coaching, which essentially consists of the following 
processes:

•  Cooperative process involves managers, experts, coachees, and other coaches.
•  Natural process The session should take place in the natural setting where the 

knowledge is usually applied.
•  Research process explores the enquiry with people in the organization.
•  Knowledge acquisition process (articulation) Finds out the tacit knowledge and 

puts it into a useful and articulated form.
•  Interactive process Follows the experiential learning cycle (Kolb, 1984; see Chapter 3).
•  Auditing process Validates and verifies the knowledge gained.
•  Organizational process The approach developed needs to be context specific and 

sensitive to the organizational culture.

Process 1

Reflection: 
Internalization

Action: 
Articulation

Combination

Process 1, 2, ... n

Person A Person A, B, ... x

Abstract conception:

Figure 5.2 Learning cycles and knowledge network



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 73

Translating Kolb’s learning cycle into a knowledge elicitation process, Bell and 
Hardiman used different interpretations and terminologies, which we expand as follows:

•  Collect (concrete experience): one has to collect relevant data, information and 
knowledge from all possible sources (see Figures 5.1 and 5.2).

•  Reflect (reflection): the coach and coachee need to spend some time thinking 
about what has been learned.

•  Theorize (abstract conception): one must record the patterns that have emerged 
from the coaching engagements, make sense of the data by deriving meaningful 
knowledge from them, and represent the knowledge in both useful and explicit 
forms.

•  Plan (action): one should plan where one needs to go next.

Role of top team

The management of the knowledge flow process and of the knowledge network 
within an organization is usually initiated from the strategic cognition in the top 
management team. Thus the characteristics of the top team would have a significant 
impact upon the overall organizational performance in terms of its corporate strategic 
change and strategic consensus. The results from empirical studies over hundreds of 
large firms from diverse (but mostly private) sectors during the late 1980s and 1990s 
have demonstrated some significant correlation between top team diversity – in age, 
demography, educational level, location, management function, tenure and the like – 
and organizational performance, both in the short and in the long term, with mixed 
conclusions regarding the intervening variables (for specific research studies, see 
Murray, 1989; Wiersema and Bantel, 1992; Markoczy, 1997; Lioukas and Chambers, 
1998; Miller, Burke and Glick, 1998; Sutcliffe and Huber, 1998, Chattopadhyay, 
Glick, Miller and Huber, 1999; Smith, olian, Smith and Flood, 1999).

There seemed to be an optimal level of diversity for the top team to perform 
effectively and efficiently. We hypothesize that the relationship between the top 
team, diversity and organizational performance may be in the form of an upside- 
down U-shaped curve – a shape similar to those produced in stress and performance 
relationships (see Figure 5.3).

Very little has been known about the exact degree of diversity that produces the 
optimal organizational performance. This is a subject of research in the areas of 
measurement of team diversity and team members’ attitude towards diversity (see the 
next chapter for a measurement framework). However, one implication of the relation-
ship between diversity and performance is clear. To maintain a sustainable high 
performance, diversity within the organization (in particular at the top team level) would 
need to be harnessed and managed so that the team members can achieve strategic con-
sensus through shared visions, beliefs, values, understandings and insights. Lipman-
Blumen (1996) advocates the connective leadership model, in which leaders need to 
connect their own and others’ visions within the team and their groups. one key 
question is: What does the top team look like? To answer such a question would require us 
to unpack the  variables that contribute to management competence. We shall direct our 
attention to the characteristics of management competence in the next section.



74 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Managerial and Leadership Competencies

What are the characteristics of a leader in the top team? Leaders in the top team need 
to communicate with their team members in a way that resonates with their sense of 
purpose. This requires the leader to have compelling vision that is grounded on ethics. 
it also requires personal and social awareness – the so called emotional intelligence 
or ei (Goleman, 1995, 1998). There are many different leadership styles (Burns, 
1978; Mintzberg, 1994; Hamel, 1996; Porter, 1996; Bass, 1998; Goleman, Boyatzis 
and McKee, 2003; Bass and Riggio, 2005; Alban-Metcalfe and Alimo-Metcalfe, 
2007; Lee and Roberts, 2010):

•  affiliative style: ensures a good working relationship between team members; 
maintains harmony in the team;

•  authentic style: mobilizes people into action undertaken for a personal purpose, 
and it does so through the leader’s charisma and genuineness;

•  coaching style: connects employees with the organizational objective by improving 
their performance;

•  democratic style: ensures the commitment of team members by seeking consensus 
and expressing appreciation of their input;

•  engaging style: engages the leader together with others in an organizational mission;
•  directive style: commands action; provides a sense of direction and certainty;
•  laissez-faire style: takes it easy;
•  pace-setting style: sets a standard of high performance for the team by demon-

strating the leader’s own competence;
•  strategic style: provides organizational strategy and plans for action;
•  transactional style: intervenes as needed – interferes as little as possible;
•  transformational style: energizes people into action carried out with a sense of 

purpose by raising their consciousness, emotions and awareness about the ethics 
and meaning that resonate with their needs and values;

•  inspirational (visionary) style: inspires team members to share the dream and to 
move towards a long-term goal.

Organizational  
performance

Diversity

Figure 5.3 organizational performance versus top team diversity



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 75

different leadership styles are underpinned by different leadership models. For example, 
the Connective Leadership Model consists of nine leadership styles that are grouped 
into three sets: direct, relational and instrumental (Lipman-Blumen, 1996). depending 
on circumstances, each leadership style may result in a different kind of impact. Simply 
using a single leadership style would not be effective. To produce a high-performance 
team, leaders would need to be flexible and to adopt a range of leadership styles, as 
appropriate. As in the case of diversity in the top team, there is an optimal combination 
of different leadership styles and an optimal level of using them. Research has shown 
that the optimal number is around four (Fitzsimmons and Guise, 2010).

Both top and middle management teams would need to develop individual 
 competencies in order to perform a range of leadership roles and styles of response 
appropriate to different situations. According to the Chartered Management 
institute’s (CMi) assessment of its Charter Manager’s Competence, managers need 
to demonstrate the following qualities:

•  They should lead people – provide a clear purpose and direction; inspire trust, respect 
and shared values (inspirational and transformational leadership);  communicate 
clearly and succinctly; develop and support individuals and team members (coaching 
leadership); resolve problems and conflicts with positive  outcomes (affiliative leader-
ship); consistently apply strategic thinking (strategic leadership); adapt a leadership 
style to take account of diverse situations (flexible leadership).

•  They should meet customer needs – develop effective customer relationships;  create 
customer-driven improvements to products or services; manage activities to meet 
customer requirements; work to improve levels of customer service and satisfaction.

•  They should manage change – encourage others to be creative and innovative; 
identify opportunities for change and development; plan and drive change; man-
age others through the change process; take account of all stakeholder issues.

•  They should manage information and knowledge – establish information management 
and communications systems; provide and use appropriate information to support 
decision making; develop and exploit organizational knowledge and skills; manage 
complexity to positive effect.

•  They should manage projects, processes and resources – optimize the use of financial 
and other services; increase operational efficiency and effectiveness; plan and priori-
tize projects and activities; deliver on time, to budget and to the standard required.

•  They should manage themselves – demonstrate resilience in achieving personal 
goals; use appropriate levels of influence and persuasion; apply good professional 
and ethical practice; develop effective personal networks.

Leadership and Organization Development through Coaching

From the analyses developed in the previous section, which supports the latest trends 
in organizational development, we advocate that coaching and mentoring can help 
leaders and managers to:

•  develop their leadership styles;
•  improve their awareness of themselves and the others;



76 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  improve their level of professional competence;
•  improve effectiveness in their jobs;
•  improve their communication and management skills;
•  manage and create a high-performance team;
•  learn effectively.

in consequence, when an organization has a significant number of middle- and senior-
level managers who, through coaching and mentoring programmes, become high 
performers, that organization will be a competent and learning organization. To 
achieve this state, we need to establish the link between a competent organization 
and  managerial competencies; and we need to know how coaching and mentoring can 
be introduced to help improve the competence of the staff and of the organization.

Research into organizational psychology has tended to link managerial compe-
tencies with the total sum of cognitive styles and personality traits of which ei is 
merely a part (Austin, 2008; Mikolajczak, Luminet, Leroy and Roy, 2007; and Smith, 
Ciarrochi, and Heaven, 2008). These are commonly measured using psychometric 
tests such as the Myers–Briggs Types indicators (MBTi; Myers, 1962) and the 
embedded Figure Test (Witkin, 1962). The embedded Figure Test assesses the 
 individual’s cognitive ability to separate foreground figures from their background 
environment (that is, his or her field independence). MBTi operates with four 
 dimensions of personality types:

 1 extravert–introvert;
 2 sensing–intuitive;
 3 feeling–thinking;
 4 perceiving–judging.

The learning cycle and the learning styles we developed in Chapter 3 can be used as a 
measurement of the managers’ decision-making behaviour.

The following significant correlations between cognitive styles and decision- making 
behaviour have been established by Leonard, Scholl and Kowalski (1999):

•  concrete experience – associates with feeling and field independence;
•  abstract conceptualization – thinking and field dependence;
•  active experimentation – extravert;
•  reflective observation – introvert;
•  analytical decision making – sensing;
•  conceptual decision making – introvert.

At the same time, Leonard et al.’s (1999) study also found that field dependence 
 correlates with being intuitive, while field independence correlates with sensing. 
Given this insight into managers’ learning styles, coaching would be a more effective 
way of helping managers to improve their competence than any generic training. 
Coaches could tailor their programme of development for coachees individually, by 
working with their cognitive style and promoting their signature strengths. The key 
challenge in an organization is the initial barrier to introducing coaching into the 
organization as part of its culture for change.



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 77

Developing a Coaching Culture

To sustain high performance throughout an organization, a learning culture needs to be 
developed. This can be done by developing a coaching culture within the organization. 
How do we know that an organization has a coaching culture? An organization with a 
coaching culture has the following 15 characteristics (Chaplain, 2003; Hardingham, 
Brearley, Moorhouse and Venter, 2004; Clutterbuck and Megginson, 2005):

1 The organization shows a commitment to develop the learning capacity of its 
employees.

2 The leadership styles of the organization are predominantly non-directive.
3 People became leaders within the organization according to their passion rather 

than seniority or position.
4 developing others and creating a learning environment is part of the managerial 

role.
5 Coaching and learning are embedded in the organizational process.
6 Members of staff coach and mentor one another at various stages of their 

career.
7 Coaching is a predominantly cognitive style of leadership, management, and 

team work.
8 Goal setting is a normal way of working.
9 Teams are organized according to members’ interests and expertise.

10 There is a good team relationship.
11 Team members who implement a decision are given autonomy to manage their 

own goal and make operational decisions.
12 Recognition and rewards are awarded to teams rather than individuals.
13 There are regular performance reviews for both teams and individuals.
14 People throughout the organization value learning.
15 There is a prevalent atmosphere of openness, recognition and respect within the 

teams and throughout the organization.

To develop the culture described above, first of all, one or more key persons would 
need to introduce coaching into the organization. You may call this person a learning 
champion; Wenger (2009) called these people ‘social artists’. They may be anyone 
within the organization, but they would have to gain commitment and support from 
members of the senior management team.

Introducing a Coaching Programme within an Organization

As with any project appraisal, for a coaching or mentoring programme to be approved 
by the board of directors within a reasonably sized organization, the coaching advo-
cates would usually be required to make a business case to demonstrate its value for 
money. A typical business case may consist of the following component cases:

•  a strategic case: this sets out the strategy of the coaching programme and how it 
helps to deliver the organizational objectives as part of the corporate strategy; for 



78 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

example, coaching may facilitate greater use of the organization’s strategic intelli-
gence and may lead to widely used management practice;

•  an economic case: a project appraisal using techniques such as cost–benefit anal-
ysis (see Chapter 10 for framework and details);

•  a financial case: this one checks to see if the budget holder could afford the 
programme;

•  a commercial case: this one shows how the programme contributes to the 
commercial aspect of the organization;

•  a project management case: this one demonstrates that the programme is achiev-
able by carrying out scooping exercises and feasibility studies.

As part of the business case, the project manager should also carry out an impact 
assessment. This aims to assess all the possible impact of the programme upon 
the  organization, its customers and its employees. From the perspective of 
 diversity, the impact assessment should include an equality impact assessment as 
well as a risk assessment. Targets can be set within a proposed coaching programme 
to help progress in terms of producing outputs, delivering outcomes and meeting 
organizational objectives. Targets should be SMARTeR, in other words they 
should be:

•  specific – not vague but with enough details for implementation;
•  measurable – quantifiable;
•  achievable – they should stretch, but within one’s capacity;
•  relevant/realistic – this is closely related to being achievable, but the targets also 

need to be relevant to the overall goal;
•  time-bound – they should have specific dates (when by);
•  evaluative – assessable at the end in terms of their impact and return on investment;
•  reviewable – possible to be reviewed at appropriate intervals, to check on 

progress, and at the end of the implementation, to consider the implications of 
the impact.

The above could be embedded within a coaching and mentoring programme and 
could guide the choice of coaching techniques (see Chapter 8).

For the appraisal of a coaching programme to be successful, the following points 
need to be specified at the outset:

•  the availability of coach and other specialist resources that may be needed;
•  the cost and benefits of the programme;
•  the quality assurance;
•  how knowledge from coaching may be transferred;
•  a project plan for the programme, setting out key objectives, milestones, resources 

and coaching streams.

Before any coaching programme is introduced, it is important for the programme 
owner (budget-holder) to identify a clear need, which is also in the interests of 
the  organization as well as individual staff. Accordingly, a statement of the rationale 



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 79

for the coaching programme should be developed. Key questions for introducing a 
coaching programme include:

•  is the rationale for the programme clear?
•  is it reasonable to assume that coaching will be cost-effective? in other words, 

would the benefits of coaching exceed the costs?
•  What are we trying to achieve?
•  What are our objectives?
•  What would constitute successful coaching and mentoring outcomes?
•  Have similar objectives been set in other proposals – such as training programmes 

that could be adapted?
•  Are the coaching objectives consistent with the organization’s strategic aims and 

objectives?
•  Are the coaching objectives defined to reflect outcomes (e.g. improved 

performance, stress reduction or enhanced sustainable organizational and personal 
growth) rather than outputs (e.g. a number of coaching sessions, coaching prose-
cutions or mentoring matching), which will be the focus of the particular coach-
ing programme?

•  How might the coaching objectives and outcomes be measured?
•  Are the coaching objectives defined in such a way that progress towards meeting 

them can be monitored?
•  What factors are critical to coaching success?
•  What SMARTeR targets can be set?
•  What targets does the coaching programme need to meet?

Coaching intervention can incur costs and create inspirational distortions from the 
coachees’ perspectives. These must be taken into account when it comes to designing 
any coaching programme within an organization. For example, a coaching programme 
may be successful in raising the coachees’ aspiration, but some of them might then 
feel the need to move on; some might even consider the option of leaving the orga-
nization that funds the programme. This would involve extra costs for the organiza-
tion and needs to be taken into account in terms of a psychological contract and 
contingency plan.

Coaches would therefore need to understand that, to introduce a coaching and 
mentoring programme, they would need to overcome the following barriers or 
constraints:

•  limited resources: for example, time and budget;
•  managers’ preoccupation with the resources required and their lack of focus on 

the benefits;
•  preoccupations with the possible problems encountered instead of a focus on 

solutions;
•  too high or unrealistic expectations – for example, a simple solution that will fix 

all the complex problems;
•  resistance from staff – for example, the ‘not invited here’ syndrome;
•  being misled by the ‘hype’ of coaching and mentoring;



80 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  preoccupations with status: coachees or mentees may want to enhance their status 
by being mentored by a senior member of staff or coached by a high-profile 
expert.

in order to identify the scope of the issues involved and the basis for coaching or 
mentoring, the coach or mentor may need to carry out some research in a form of 
scooping study that should cover the following:

•  the objectives of the coaching or mentoring programme: these should be consis-
tent with the organization’s policy, its departmental objectives, and wider micro- 
economic objectives;

•  the result of coaching or mentoring – namely if nothing has changed, or if the 
change has been minimal;

•  the market situation of the organization: would the coaching or mentoring 
programme help prevent any market failure that the organization might face, or 
would it improve employment levels?

•  current and projected trends and published forecasts of the organization and how 
the coaching or mentoring can help improve future results;

•  potential beneficiaries: those who would benefit from the coaching or mentoring 
programme should be identified, as well as those who may be disadvantaged (for 
example, those who could not attend the programme in comparison with their 
colleagues who could);

•  technological developments: for example, e-learning, online tools, and so on;
•  whether the coaching or mentoring programme would change in scope or 

 magnitude over time: the effects can multiply as a result of a network of coaches 
or mentors and coachees or mentees.

From the above analysis it appears that, if a coaching or mentoring intervention were 
shown to be worthwhile, then the objectives, outputs and outcomes of the proposed 
new programme need to be stated clearly. This allows the identification of the full 
range of coaching or mentoring options that an organization may adopt. examples of 
coaching or mentoring outputs and outcomes include:

•  number of coaches or mentors matching;
•  number of coachees or mentees assisted;
•  value of extra output, or improvement in the efficiency of the coachees’ or 

 mentees’ performance;
•  development of skills;
•  number of coaching or mentoring places;
•  number of those who completed the coaching or mentoring programme;
•  value of extra human capital and/or earnings capacity;
•  exam results (e.g. Master of Business and Adminstration);
•  improvement to the productivity of the organization.

Could you identify which of the above are outputs and which are outcomes?



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 81

embedding the coaching and mentoring culture  
within an organization

A coaching or mentoring programme can be introduced first as a pilot. once it has 
been implemented, its stakeholders could then learn from the experience and evaluate 
the programme in terms of its effectiveness, return on investment and value for 
money, so that future business cases can be made for a wider implementation (see 
Chapter 10 for formal methods of evaluation). The wider participation of coaching 
and learning can spread through organization via diffusion. This is likely to be an 
 evolutionary process that is summarized in Figure  5.4. it would usually have the 
 following six stages (Hawkins and Smith, 2006):

1 introduction of an individual executive who coaches for a few members of the 
organization.

2 development of wide organizational coaching and mentoring programmes to 
build learning capacity.

3 Support for coaching and mentoring initiatives to ensure their sustainability.
4 embedding of coaching and mentoring as part of the human resources (HR) and 

performance management function.
5 developing coaching as part of leadership styles and management competence.
6 Continued learning and consolidation of the learning culture by gathering the 

feedback from all stakeholders.

Coaching and mentoring initiatives

Coaching

Internal
coach /
mentor

Small group of
1 to 1 coaching

Managers and
team leader

Team
coaching

Affiliative

Managing self

Learning

High
performance

Authentic

Transformational

Leadership styles

A learning organization

Shared vision

HR

Senior
management

External coach
Coaching

market

Competence

Impact
evaluation

Customer
satisfaction

Organizational
performance

Leading people

Meeting 
customer needs

Managing
change

Managing 
information and

knowledge
Managing projects,

processes and
resources

Figure 5.4 developing a coaching culture



82 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Coaching in groups and team building
As a way of embedding coaching and mentoring within the organization, it may be 
effective to carry them out as part of the team’s activities (for instance, to discuss the 
concept and planning during the team’s day away and to place the coaching or 
 mentoring as an item on the agenda at regular meetings). Techniques for group 
coaching, such as outsider witnesses and definition ceremony (described in Chapters 
7 and 8), would be useful to adopt in the context of the organization.

Widening the Context

The learning organization concept transfers well to communities. Sociology speaks of 
movements for change in communities; and change is underpinned by learning. Social 
movements for improvement rely on the realization of a vision, a motivation chan-
nelled into positive action that somehow is different from prior attempts to bring 
about collective change (eyerman and Jamison, 1991). only through exploration of 
old issues in new ways can change be brought about, as individuals have new insights 
and learning to shape their action. Communicated individual insights are not enough 
to trigger collective action. Collective action requires the following ingredients: the 
insight from experience in the context of making a better world, which has transfer-
able significance and resonance for others; the strong association with processes that 
lead to desired outcomes; and the scope to motivate others to believe that those 
 outcomes are possible through their action (empowerment).

increased confidence in one’s abilities as a result of affirmation and positive  relationships 
with others brings about empowerment. The empowerment of individuals beyond and 
within existing hierarchies brings new momentum into the context, to release movement 
and change. Sometimes organizations are good at evidencing lip-service consultation to 
create document trails that might convey the impression that empowerment and the 
involvement of all parties have taken place, particularly in the service sector. often that 
involvement is superficial. For example, professional and service users may fear that 
transgressing boundaries may create role confusion or may undermine their expertise. 
So it is in their interest to maintain the status quo. However, according to our universal 
integrated framework (Chapter 6) and the case studies based on our experience, listening 
and challenging roles and boundaries are processes of constructive development as long 
as risks to continuing service delivery are assessed and managed. one leader in a social 
enterprise organization said that the expertise of professionals might contribute to the 
improved service outcomes, but only their wisdom of truly opening themselves up to 
listening deeply to service users would improve the quality of their experience.

Practitioners in a range of service engagements may describe stories of perpetual 
complainants. Their motives may be about undermining communities rather than 
building them, but therein lies the challenge of discernment. discernment, however, 
is the stage that follows after deep listening. We have rarely known a complaint that 
did not change something. For, even if there is no basis for the complaint, there is 
always learning about policy and forced self-evaluation by the agency in the process of 
dealing with complaints, structures in place to communicate, the nature of the multi-
agency at work or an insight into the background of the complainant that triggers 
new and unexpected action.



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 83

Social support for coaching and mentoring

Providing social support for coaches forms a wider dimension of coaching and men-
toring, beyond the traditional mentoring role where a senior person simply supports 
the less experienced mentees. The looser concept of coaching and mentoring in our 
universal integrated framework embodied the function of social support, but without 
some of the hierarchical constraints. This new dimension can be described as constel-
lations of developmental relationships (Kram and Hall, 1996). Access to develop-
mental relationships increases satisfaction. Social support includes emotional support 
by way of providing reassurance and self-worth, of listening and of showing concern. 
it also gives appraisal in the form of feedback and confirmation, informational support, 
instrumental support such as tangible assistance, investment of time and resources. 
Friendship and caring can play a big role in helping individuals maintain self-esteem 
(Wills, 1991). While the sponsor’s role of mentoring was important for facilitating 
learning in a career development situation, the psycho-social support of develop-
mental relationships brought about learning and positive change and could reduce 
stress. This loser concept of lateral and multidimensional mentoring has a place in the 
development of wider support: it engenders learning in communities such as prisons 
and schools, support for the ill, and so on. Coaching and mentoring, peer/lateral or 
group coaching and developmental relationships that are convergent with coaching 
and mentoring qualities are all vital in building supported communities that are 
learning and changing.

For some people, the focus on the social support side of coaching and mentoring, 
underpinned as it is by qualities and skills, represents nothing more than the 
development of friendships. However, we all know how destructive some friendships 
can be. Some individuals naturally favour giving advice over listening, criticism over 
praise and encouragement, and these ingredients might work counter to building 
self-esteem and empowering individuals. Likewise, the befriended might struggle to 
move the relationship forward in a purposeful way. So, in this context, we need to 
work with whole communities to fine-tune their natural befriending behaviour. A 
combination of busy work and home lives for many, use of and access to technology, 
increased independence, migrant workforces and diffused families means that there is 
more pressure on one’s time and a tendency to adopt the quick fix approach to 
 problems rather than to develop relationships for their own sake.

it might seem an odd suggestion that we would benefit from returning to some old 
principles of good listening that might bring about new thinking. no one is pretend-
ing that coaching or mentoring is rocket science or something very new. it is often the 
simplest intervention, with its roots in natural behaviour, that generates the best out-
comes. it is in social coaching and mentoring that the benefits are most impressive. 
For example, in prisons, the mentoring of inmates by outsiders can prepare them for 
life outside and for re-employment in particular. organizations such as the national 
Health Service in the UK and many community groups are beginning to recognize 
the merits of mentoring inmates with histories of mental illness and addiction as a 
preventative method, to stop hospital or rehabilitation unit re-admission.

Likewise, mentoring in schools has been particularly effective in working with 
 disadvantaged children. Their learning is often not limited by ability alone; sometimes 
they lack self-esteem and the confidence to try. For some individuals, the opportunity 



84 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

to sit with an adult ‘who is on-side’, encouraging and interested in them, is a new 
experience. The promising results from such encounters have led to region-wide 
mentoring schemes designed to promote learning for all. once young people are 
 confident in themselves as learners, they are able to input into the wider learning 
community in an active way. one of the most powerful examples of mentoring in the 
community is the situation where those in traditionally powerful roles are mentees to 
those who have been previously marginalized. Both parties have a chance to explore 
issues from different perspectives and to gain a new empathy as a result.

The micro-context of coaching or mentoring is entirely congruent with the organi-
zational or community journey to improvement through goal setting, through an 
exploration of the context of operation and reality of the individual (mapping the envi-
ronment), through a consideration of the issues from all possible perspectives – including 
that of tensions in the system and of the move to reconciliation or balance through the 
generation of options capable of bringing about positive change. Through the process 
of working beyond traditional boundaries, those who engage in coaching and mentor-
ing are bringing in new ideas and importing best practice into their communities.

The need for collaborative and partnership approaches to learning

The social economic condition in which we operate presents challenges for collabora-
tive working. Within the changing environment, alliances are the key to timely and 
efficient deliverables. in many cases, outsourcing and partnering in areas where orga-
nizations are not competitive may make economical sense. The continued relationship 
with stakeholders and the customer base is also important. Respect and the positive 
affirmation of customers and stakeholders are vital to success. Many people can 
remember the Gerald Ratner case, where he described some of his jewellery products 
as ‘crap’, thereby insulting his customers and triggering a downslide in sales and, ulti-
mately, his own resignation. Perhaps that was a bit extreme, but there are many col-
laborations between organizations and the communities they serve that operate on a 
subtle undermining of those communities, on gentle ridicule, and on a questioning of 
their capability to participate in the collaborative process or their judgement as to 
what is good for them. All of this can create a slightly resentful community or hostile 
tolerance. To maintain a sustainable partnership, the stakeholders need to develop a 
learning community.

The need for learning communities

The changing environment also presents challenges to organizations. As discussed 
in Chapter 2, many coaching scholars have attempted to explain the factors under-
pinning complexity. Stacey (1996) found that organizations moved between stability, 
instability and complexity, but the ‘frozen’ stage described by Lewin was rarely a 
reality, as change was permanent. in complex environments, social networking 
becomes essential, as does collaborative work that builds on those connections to 
ensure seamless processes from customer and stakeholder perspectives.

Knowledge aiming to fuel change is an emergent quality of learning; and informal 
contexts speed up the availability of knowledge in a timely way, to make the most of 
the existing opportunities for innovation and change. Formal, controlled and 



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 85

programmed environments generate cautious, orderly activities, which tend to be 
limited by their structure according to the past experience. informal emergent and 
iterative thinking environments generate active experimentation in the present chaos – 
from which leading-edge thinking derives. This kind of flexible environment is based 
on Kessels’ (1996) corporate curriculum model – enabling participants to develop a 
tolerance of uncertainty and change.

Consumers are showing more interest in the processes and mechanisms that 
underpin production and service delivery – be these related to ingredients, tech-
nology, or the ethical or unethical nature of production. one key question that 
learning organizations need to ask themselves is: ‘Are we traditional or leading edge, 
and how does our strategy match our values?’

organizations need to be clearer about what they are doing, why they are doing it and 
how they compare with others. We work in organizations and communities where we 
have to engage with the process of change and in so doing to equip ourselves to be active 
rather than passive. At the corporate level, the requirement to continue to learn in order 
to remain at the leading edge is called developing a learning organization – a concept 
formulated by Pedlar, Burgoyne and Boydel (1991) as a strategy for sustainable 
development. Throughout all their corporative lives, organizations are required to be 
active learners, self-modernizers and improvers, reaching out to the changing context in 
which we all operate. Pedlar et al. (1991) also recognized that organizations need to 
stimulate, support and challenge people through the process of change by ensuring that 
they are receptive learners, creative thinkers and implementers. Learning and change go 
hand in hand. Many situation-based paradigms have emerged that partner active experi-
ence (real work) with learning reflection in order to bring about change; such are proj-
ect-based learning, action learning and coaching or mentoring. The move to become a 
learning organization takes us away from traditional top-down command into the sphere 
of involvement, questioning and challenge. We all need to be players rather than 
observers. if we want to be at the forefront, we have to go beyond participation – to 
leadership in creativity or innovation and to the implementation of what stimulates them.

There are frameworks to guide organizations in their modernizing. Most models 
are underpinned by the need to set goals for changes on the basis of a clear under-
standing of what is to be achieved. Processes of mapping the environment in which 
organizations operate, processes and flow of activities and analysis and redesign are 
precursors to improvement action.

organizations need to know how they will measure the impact of their changes and 
present the data to others. improvement strategies at organizational level need to 
balance the needs of capacity and demand, identify the delays in the systems and 
 bottlenecks, the quality issues that impact on customer experience and the maximiza-
tion of productivity. To understand these issues, we need to understand stakeholder 
views at every point in the process and see the range of perspectives. As for moving 
people forward in change, understanding their views and engaging them in a consul-
tative process early on prepares the ground well. However, there are inevitable human 
dynamics to manage through the process of change, and hence improvement  strategies 
work to ensure that there are enough skills and knowledge in the system to facilitate 
change at individual, group and organizational level.

embedding the change or the improvement at a deeper level, to make it last beyond 
the life of a funded initiative or flavour of the month initiative, is a real challenge and 



86 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

is aided by ownership, the early experience of benefits, the reflection of personal 
learning and the spread of the best practice. ‘Spread’ or take-up of the best practice 
rarely works when it is a ‘must do this way or else’ mandate. Success is based on the 
establishment of a sound methodology (but it should also fit within local planning 
goals), on detailed environmental mapping and on a committed, locally distributed 
leadership cohort. Sustainability is increased when all partners and stakeholders have 
learning mechanisms through which to work in mutually beneficial ways. developing 
a community of practice could be one of the learning mechanisms.

Developing a community of practice
The phrase ‘community of practice’ was mentioned on various occasions (without a 
proper definition) in Chapter 3, in the context of learning theories. A more detailed 
discussion is provided here.

The concept of community of practice was first introduced by Jean Lave, an 
anthropologist, and etienne Wenger, a researcher; it was based on their observation 
of five traditional apprenticeship systems. in each situation, a community emerged 
over time, which in turn served as a ‘living curriculum’ for the new members who 
entered the system. The pair called these communities ‘communities of practice’ 
(Lave and Wenger, 1991). on the basis of an ethnographic study of a claims processing 
system, Wenger (1998) developed the concept further, drawing on a social theory of 
learning that became its foundation (this was discussed in Chapter 3). in recent years, 
Wenger and his colleagues advocated the notion of ‘communities of practice’ as a key 
to knowledge management for leaders in organizations – and this includes the role of 
stewardship in internet communities (Wenger, Mcdermott and Snyder, 2002; 
Wenger, White and Smith, 2009).

Semantically, the phrase ‘communities of practice’ is made up of two things: 
 communities and their practice. A community is a collection of individuals who 
interact with each other and are very often in pursuit of a common goal – be that 
 winning a football match or discussing one’s reading of a book in a book club gath-
ering. in pursuing their common goal, these individuals learn how to interact (e.g. by 
creating or defining the rules of engagement or by observing established social 
norms). effectively the social interaction is a process of learning – namely learning by 
doing (learning how to do something and how to relate with others by doing things 
together and by gaining experience from it). Wenger (1998: 45) called this social pro-
cess ‘collective learning’, and the common goal a ‘shared enterprise’.

From the systems perspective, the community of practice is an emergent property: 
it results from the ‘collective learning’ of individuals who sustain their pursuit of ‘a 
shared enterprise’; over a period of time, a ‘shared repertoire’ may be formed. Wenger 
(2011) simplifies the notion of ‘community of practice’ still further, defining it 
 succinctly as ‘a group of people who share a concern or a passion for something they 
do, and learn how to do it better as they interact regularly’. To summarize, the 
defining features of such entities are:

•  the domain: a shared learning need (enterprise);
•  the community: an entity that evolves from the collective learning;
•  the practice: the social interactions and the resources (or shared repertoire) they 

produce, which in turn affects the practice.



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 87

in other words, a learning organization is a community of practice. To develop such 
an organization or community, one would need first to have a shared enterprise, 
 identify a shared need, develop an environment that facilitates social interactions and 
provide the resources for collective learning.

Whether this community is a local community interest company, a large interna-
tional corporation or a virtual community over the internet, it would need to develop 
a community of practice and its learning capability. As mentioned in Chapter 3, such 
a community should have four fundamental components – which are reiterated here 
and placed within an organizational context. To develop and maintain a community 
of practice, a learning organization would need to continuously develop:

1 Social learning spaces: it should design its environment so as to make it offer var-
ious suitable meeting spaces. These spaces may be meeting rooms for one-to-one 
coaching or for team meetings, or coffee areas for social interactions. They should 
allow genuine conversations to take place between peers. There should also be 
spaces within which team members feel safe to talk about their experiences.

2 Learning citizenship: it should promote an ethics of learning. This may take the 
form of a code of ethics and good practices. However, to ensure substantial com-
mitment from the staff, such a code needs to be promoted through coaching and 
mentoring rather than being imposed.

3 Social artists: a learning organization needs to have leaders who are an inspiration 
for others and address the ‘social dynamics’ within the organization.

4 Learning governance: it should develop some principles of ‘governance’ that 
guide the configuration of the organizational environment in terms of its social 
learning spaces and processes.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

Collaborations work well where there is mutual trust and respect, where power is 
 perceived to be equally distributed and potential benefits are seen as mutual. Perception 
and reality are not always the same. For instance, one individual can attribute and 
interpret a situation differently from another, perhaps on the basis of a prior assump-
tion. The reputation of an organization or agency can continue to operate long after 
the activity that brought it about has subsided. Authentic relationships between stake-
holders and community partners, relationships based on the here and now, can help 
organizations change their reputations on the basis of the current evidence of their 
practice. A change of leadership at the top of an organization cannot always bring 
about change in the way an organization behaves. Leadership in an organization can 
be working to a very different script from that of the supporting body beneath it, and 
it can have a very different mission, too. Tacit behaviour and overt behaviour can pre-
sent some contradictory information to stakeholders about what the real mission is.

There are different types of knowledge that a high-performance team needs to 
share. These could be explicit, tacit or both. dictionary and recipe knowledge are 
explicit, while axiomatic and people knowledge are implicit. directory knowledge 
may be either implicit or explicit. The management of these different types of 
knowledge requires active acquisition or creation, knowledge capture and storage, 



88 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

and knowledge diffusion and transfer. Coaching and mentoring are identified as key 
 vehicles in the facilitation of knowledge acquisition and transfer.

From the discussion of this chapter, we have deduced that the role of a leader in the 
learning organization is to:

•  ensure that a vision exists, maintain and share that vision rather than creating it 
(inspirational and transforming leadership);

•  inspire commitment;
•  act as a designer of the organization – a champion or a social artist;
•  design learning processes, coaching and mentoring programmes;
•  translate implicit assumptions into explicit knowledge, make tacit knowledge 

explicit and create new tacit knowledge through the learning cycle;
•  manage the diversity of the top team and achieve strategic consensus;
•  ensure good decision making throughout the organization;
•  empower the staff;
•  be capable of leaps of abstraction – that is, make inferences from observation and 

produce valid generalizations;
•  maintain a coaching and mentoring culture within which many members act as 

coaches or mentors.

novices may be confused when they attempt to distinguish between coach and 
 counsellor. This is partly due to the fact that counselling is an important element in 
coaching and mentoring. We could not expect coachees entering the meeting as 
 perfect human beings, free from psychological barriers and work and/or life problems 
(if so, they would not need coaching at all). Most often, they will have psychological 
 baggage, concerns and preoccupations that coaches need to identify and address 
before the coachees can be set free.

We hope this chapter has made clear that, apart from having counselling skills, suc-
cessful coaches or mentors within an organization should most likely have the follow-
ing qualities and skills:

•  Awareness: they should be aware of themselves and others, sensitive about  
their own and others’ identity, social needs, and organizational–cultural 
differences.

•  empathy: they should create a rapport with coachees and mentees as well as with 
the programme owner, who tends to be a senior manager.

•  extravert personality: they should be friendly and outgoing. The coaches love 
people, and meeting new people is part of their work. More importantly, they are 
the people to whom staff at all levels in an organization would like to talk.

•  diplomacy: they should be able to understand the organization’s politics and idio-
syncratic culture, develop good interpersonal relationships, negotiate a way round 
the organizational maze.

•  Facilitation skills: they should encourage people to talk about their problems as 
well as guiding them to discover solutions.

•  Learning skills: they should be quick to learn who knows what, particularly within 
a team and an organization.



 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring 89

•  interview skills: they should be able to conduct open interviews and focus on 
knowledge acquisition from the stakeholders.

•  Listening skills: they should listen attentively to what is being said – as well as to 
what is unsaid – and make people feel valued and respected.

•  Management of change: they should be able to initiate, embrace and manage 
change within an organization.

•  Tolerance of ambiguity: they should be able to tolerate the chaos of an organiza-
tion, where change is constant.

in this chapter we have looked at executive coaching within the context of learning 
organizations. We have argued the case for coaching as a vehicle for leveraging orga-
nizational culture and sharing organizational information; such learning culture is 
developed and maintained. Thus, apart from performing the role of a ‘learner’ and 
that of a ‘teacher’ or instructor, a coach has also a third role, namely as a facilitator for 
knowledge elicitation, transfer and management. This implies a new paradigm, which 
requires the coach to be a quick and flexible learner and to have a professional com-
petence that matches the leadership role, as well as an understanding of diversity and 
organizational culture. in Chapter 6 we describe this new paradigm with the help of 
a universal integrated framework designed to show how leadership competence can 
be developed, and we explore the qualities of coaches more systematically.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

developing a Universal integrative 
Framework for Coaching  

and Mentoring

Introduction

in the last chapter i have proposed that coaching or mentoring is a vehicle for  developing 
a learning organization or community. The fact that change has been the trigger for the 
need to develop a coaching model applicable across diverse cultures is the focus of this 
chapter. Here i shall further expand on the issues of coaching and mentoring, taking 
them from personal and organizational contexts into a cross- cultural realm. The context 
is also enlarged to reveal international and professional aspects of the subject. i argue 
that, in order for coaching and mentoring to be  applicable across different countries, it 
has to be applicable across different cultures. on the basis of the learning theories that 
were discussed in Chapter 3, a coaching framework that underpins cross-cultural  practice 
is developed here. The earlier  version of a universal integrative framework (UiF) – which 
was developed in the first edition (Law, ireland and Hussain, 2007) and also reported in 
the literature (see Law, Laulusa and Cheng, 2009) – was set within the context of diver-
sity in the UK. in this chapter i shall explore and revise UiF further, taking on board the 
recent years’ experience of applying the framework across cultures.

i shall first extend the discussion of learning beyond the framework of the organ-
ization, to individual differences in how we conduct our relationships to stimulate 
learning. This part builds on some of the theories and research on individual learning 
in a global context and identifies the role and significance of culture and context for 
coaching success. Wider influences on learning will be considered, together with the 
impact of multimedia communications on learning relationships. Communication, 
feedback and supervision are proposed as means of building collective learning into 
coaching and mentoring, in order to ensure that both processes are part of a wider 
learning system. i shall also describe an emotional intelligence framework with an 
added cultural dimension, which supports the UiF. These features aim to help you to 
strengthen the way you work in a diverse learning context.

6



92 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

Universal Integrated Framework (UIF): Building  
on the Integrated Universal Elements of  

Diverse Mentoring Coaching

The idea of building a generic framework – a meta-model – is not new. it is well 
within the ambition of many leading academics and practitioners in the field – david 
Lane, in his workshop at the second national Conference of the Special Group in 
Coaching Psychology, attempted to help participants build their own meta-models 
(Lane, 2005). Building a meta-model has clear benefits. As Lane points out, it can 
assist coaches to integrate their coaching processes in terms of:

•  frameworks: models can be added into the framework one by one;
•  questions: coaching questions can be structured and embedded into the 

meta-model;
•  leadership: the meta-model ensures that coaches have a clear purpose, perspective 

and process.

The universal integrated framework (UiF) consists of the following unique 
characteristics:

•  learning cycle and supervision, continuous professional development (CPd);
•  appreciation of the cultural environment;
•  coach/mentor/mentee fluidity;
•  integrative continuum;
•  cross-cultural emotional intelligence;
•  a pragmatic implementation model that embeds all of the above elements;
•  communication methods and feedback mechanism.

in the following section i shall describe these features in greater detail and with 
updated information.

Learning Cycle, Supervision and Continuous  
Professional Development (CPD)

implementing the action stage of the learning cycle that was identified in Chapter 3 
would complete the learning wheel for coaching (see Figure 6.1). So, as the first step in 
building the UiF, a dynamic learning model is embedded in the coaching framework.

This constitutes the implementation phase and should underpin each element of 
the UiF. it also maps very well onto the reflective practice or continuous professional 
development (CPd) cycle (see Figures 6.2 and 6.3).

The model is consistent with supervision and CPd, which offers coachees the 
opportunity to review the coaching process and to optimize their learning. integrating 
CPd and supervision enables practitioners to achieve excellence, develop talent and 
ensure the quality of performance.

Supervision is a forum in which coaches and mentors meet their supervisors and 
talk about their coaching experience with the aim of improving their practice. They 



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 93

would review the lessons learned from that experience with help from their supervi-
sors, who very often are coaches or mentors themselves. According to Carroll (2006), 
supervision is a form of experiential learning where the work is reviewed, interviewed, 
questioned, considered and critically reflected upon – a process in which what he calls 
‘reflection-on-action’ leads to ‘reflection-for-action’. So, from the perspective of 
learning, it makes sense to integrate supervision into the UiF. This enables coaches 
and mentors to move from ‘i-learning’ to ‘we-learning’ (shared learning). The UiF 
feedback mechanism (which will be described later) may form an integral part of the 
supervision and CPd process. it can also be used to assess the impact of coaching and 

Concrete experience

Reflection

Abstract conception

Action 

Implementation:
New engagement

External 
transformation: 
towards behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

Meaning NEW future

Coaching / Mentoring / Learning
condition 

PAST experience 

Figure 6.1 Completing the dynamic coaching/mentoring/learning model

1. Description

5. Conclusion

4. Evaluation

3. Analysis Action 

Implementation:
New engagement

External 
transformation: 
towards behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

Coaching / Mentoring / Learning
condition 

2. Cognition and
emotion

6. Action plan

Figure 6.2 Reflective practice and learning cycle



94 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

mentoring on individuals’ performance and satisfaction, which is the key to realizing 
the benefits of the two processes. This would ensure that coaching or mentoring offers 
value to the business. Kadushin (1992) considers that supervision has three roles:

1 education (knowledge transfer);
2 support (psychological and practical);
3 maintenance (of standards and good practice).

CPd is an essential element of professional practice; and supervision is an important 
part of CPd (Passmore, 2011). The emphasis on learning in the UiF is consistent 
with some of the latest thinking in the coaching practice. For instance, Child, Woods, 
Willcock and Man (2011) also advocate action learning as a tool for coaching super-
vision; Campone’s (2011) three-step reflective coaching practitioner model consists 
of the same elements as the learning cycle:

1 act: document one’s experiences so as to make them serve as opportunities for 
learning and meaning making (this is research in action, reflection in action or 
thinking in action);

2 reflect: evaluate critically the underlying mental models, reframe and review 
lessons learnt (this is a process of naming and reconfiguring mental models);

3 plan: formulate a plan of action (this step leads to experimentation in action or 
active experimentation).

This three-step process enables the coach to translate knowledge into action as a 
reflective practitioner and to articulate and become aware of his or her own under-
lying ideologies and theoretical assumptions.

Fulfilment of outcomes
=

Demonstration of 
competence

Identification of CPD needs

Action plan

Synthesis of learning to 
practice

Application to practice

CPD activity

Link individual and
organizational 

objectives

Identify appropriate activities

Reflect critically

Use the learning in practice

Evaluation

Figure 6.3 CPd cycle (adapted from department of Health CPd project in the UK)



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 95

The benefits of supervision include continuous learning (Brookfield, 1991) and 
application (Basseches, 1984). Supervision

•  adapts services to new situations;
•  improves relationships;
•  coordinates activities.

in practice, supervision, like coaching, is more of an art than a science, as it involves 
personal judgement and artistry (Patterson, Wilcox and Higgs, 2006).

Appreciation of Cultural Environment

our cultural environment can be envisaged at two levels:

 1 at micro-level: in a narrow local context (organization, family, local communities);
 2 at macro-level: in a large context (global environment, environmental change and 

the planet).

or, to translate these spatial levels into the dimension of time, our cultural environ-
ment can be looked at

•  in the short term: this suits when the change we are dealing with is rapid (recent 
changes in the market shares, or day-to-day changes in the weather conditions can 
be approached from a short-term angle);

•  in the long term (which is suitable in dealing with climate change or gradual 
cultural shift).

The two dimensions are summarized in Table 6.1, but keep in mind that they may or 
may not be interrelated; for example, there may be a long-term development in a local 
community or a rapid change in the global financial market system.

The culture or the environment in which we are engaging as learners is identified 
by the appreciation of the distinguishing features present in it, and these include 
 features stemming from the physical environment – buildings, heat, light, sound; 
 features that impact on health and safety; the shared vision and purpose, motivations, 
functional and professional status, social distinctions and characteristics of groups; 
ways (both tacit and overt) of ritualized being or doing in that localized environment; 
criteria of success and the understanding of stakeholder benefits; communication 
 rituals and contextual protocols that smooth understanding among individuals and  

Table 6.1 Appreciation of the 
cultural environment

Macro Micro

Long-term Short-term



96 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

elements unique to them (motivations, teamwork style, experience of tension and 
conflict, learning style and risk strategy). All these have to be appreciated if they are 
to work harmoniously (Figure 6.4).

The culture or context of operation might be the environment we occupy or the 
attributes we extend to it – and such factors include the players who are part of our 
networks. The interplay between our own values and our perception and assessment 
of what we observe and experience is key to our appreciation of this context. our 
values are influenced by our upbringing and by the family culture we were exposed to, 
within the wider context of the community. our understanding of success and happi-
ness, our sense of self and our aspirations developed as we grew up. in this process we 
may have come to have different priorities from those of other people around us; and 
we were imbued with values for life that ultimately derive from the behaviour of 
family members and from popular phrases of advice heard at home, which we adopted 
in our own life. You might want to take a moment to reflect on some of those phrases 
that have stuck with you. For example:

•  Keep your own counsel.
•  You’ve made your bed, now lie in it.
•  Waste not, want not.
•  Give people just enough rope to hang themselves.
•  Family first.
•  People look down on us, but we stand tall.
•  The world is your oyster.
•  Look after yourself, because no one else will.
•  We all make mistakes.

Vision, Values

Physical    
environment

Political 
environment

Self

Ritualized behaviour 
(verbal and processes)

Collective and individual 
expectations including 

stakeholder / stakeholder 
group recognition

Figure 6.4 Appreciation of the cultural environment



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 97

•  That is someone’s mother (on the topic of women).
•  Be kind there, for the grace of God (on the topic of disability).
•  Keep them on a short leash (on the topic of men).

Some of these injunctions might form the basis of a false view, or one that leads 
to a false assumption. it is this family culture and, later, the wider cultural experi-
ence that give us our sense of what is right and what is wrong and determine 
how  we assess risk and our preferred way of working or being. When family 
 cultures merge – perhaps through marriage, and particularly when there are 
 children – it is amazing how strongly these early models of being and acting in the 
world battle to replicate some of the significant and favoured elements of one’s 
background culture.

The greatest perceived differences between people are differences in their 
background, race, gender, physical and mental abilities, and, in the organizational 
world, functional and professional categorizations. Yet in theories such as Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs the universal needs we share are clear and succinct. Shared values 
and goals are more important in collaborative learning than styles and approaches that 
distinguish (or pay heed to) individual behaviour (Spreitzer, 1995; see also Chapter 3 
here on social learning).

There are some core elements that we all share as learners. Learning needs motiva-
tion, support, feedback and review, although its style and content may vary. Some 
writers have drawn up models of intercultural sensitivity, which attempt to explain 
individual differences as resulting from cultural associations and propose that these 
differences should be acknowledged if the potential of relationships is to be actualized 
and developed (see Bennet, 1991; Rosinski, 2003).

The significance of culture

one of the key themes of the UiF has been that it aims to address the significance of 
culture. Understanding a culture also opens the general problem of understanding 
the life experience of others. Learning, relationships and ritualistic behaviours are illu-
sory because they are located at the boundary between the ‘internal life’ of an 
individual and the ‘external world’ of relationships, customs and organizations. 
Cultural themes are consciously and unconsciously reproduced in conformity with 
the previous pattern (Krause, 1998).

So what is culture? How is it defined and reproduced? Can culture be treated as a 
variable and separated from other things? What does it look like? ‘Culture’ is multi-
layered, like an onion – a system that can be peeled layer by layer and made to reveal 
its content (Hofstede, 1991). Using Geertz’s (1986) analogy, culture is ‘the icing on 
the cake’. But, if culture is like a cake, is it a layered cake or a marble cake? one can 
argue that culture is the process that bakes the cake (Strawson, 1996).

Hall (1976) divides culture along two dimensions: high context and low context. 
He argues that, in the low context or outer layer, individuals would not understand 
much about the meaning and context of communications within the group. When 
they are in the high context (inner layer), individuals have already become familiar 
with their context (‘contextualized’). Thus, when coachees are not familiar with the 
organization’s culture or with the context of a situation, the coach should be more 



98 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

directive and provide them with contextual information (this is the low-context 
 communication that occurs in coaching). When coachees are familiar with their 
 environment, the coach can use a more facilitative style (this is the high-context 
communication).

Hofstede (1991) regards culture as a kind of ‘human mental programming’ 
(a  product of the ‘collective programming of the mind’), which is specific to 
a group and is learned. it is a system of meanings, values and beliefs, expectations, 
and goals. These characteristics are acquired from and shared by members of 
a particular group of people, and they enable them to distinguish themselves from 
members of other groups (they contribute to the difference between in-group and 
out-group). in other words, culture makes us who we are. Hofstede’s model has 
five dimensions:

1 power distance: the degree of equality–inequality due to individuals’ different 
positions in a society;

2 individualism–collectivism: the degree to which a society values individual or 
collective achievement (which governs interpersonal relationships);

3 masculinity–femininity: the degree to which a society reinforces the traditional 
masculine work role model;

4 uncertainty avoidance: the level of tolerance of uncertainty and ambiguity;
5 long-term orientation: the degree to which the society embraces (or not) 

long-term devotion to traditional forward-thinking values.

Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner’s (1997) model of culture is also multi-layered 
but has seven dimensions:

1 universalism versus particularism: rules versus relationships;
2 individualism versus communitarianism: self-centred versus society centred;
3 specific cultures versus diffuse cultures;
4 affective cultures versus neutral cultures: emotion versus cognition;
5 achievement versus ascription: active status seeking versus passive status seeking;
6 sequential cultures versus synchronic cultures: single-tasking versus multi-tasking;
7 internal control versus external control: self-determinant versus cooperative.

From all this we can see that culture is a complex property. it is interwoven with indi-
viduals’ self-identity, professional and organizational values, and beliefs. it governs 
one’s behaviour and social interactions (Hall, 1963; Hofstede, 1980; Kondo, 1990; 
Levi-Strauss, 1966; Schwartz, 1994a).

on the basis of the work of socio-cultural anthropologists Hofstede (1980) 
and  Schwartz (1994b), Rosinski (2003, 2006) proposed that leveraging cultural 
 differences may take the following stages and steps:

1 recognition and acceptance: acknowledge and accept differences of culture; 
understand that to accept means to respect – which does not mean to agree; 
appreciate the positive aspects that differences may bring;

2 adaptation (not assimilation or adoption): empathize with the cultural differences 
even though this may cause some discomfort;



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 99

3 integration: evaluate situations from different cultural perspectives, yet stay 
focused on the reality, without being distracted by having too many options (this 
is useful in the GRoW coaching process in cross-cultural applications);

4 leverage: make the most of differences, strive for synergy, proactively look for 
gems in different cultures, achieve unity through diversity.

Rosinski’s (2003) cultural orientations framework deals with the following aspects 
(each consists of a number of elements or dimensions):

1 Sense of power and responsibility (control, harmony, humility) People from differ-
ent cultures have different beliefs about their power and responsibility to deter-
mine control, harmony, and humility.

2 Time management approaches (scarce–plentiful; monochronic–polychronic; past–
present–future) People from different cultures have different views about the 
value and the flow of time and different emphases on the past, the present or the 
future.

3 Definitions of identity and purpose (being–doing; individualistic–collectivistic) 
People from different cultures may have different values and different points of 
emphasis about their identity and purpose.

4 Organizational arrangements (hierarchy–equality; universalist–particularist; 
 stability–change; competitive–collaborative) different cultures have different 
 traditions in organizational arrangements and place different values on the way 
things are done within an organization or favour different ways of doing things.

5 Notions of territory and boundaries (protective; sharing) People from different cul-
tures have different preferences in terms of the extent to which they share 
information.

6 Communication patterns (high–low context; direct–indirect; affective–neutral; 
formal–informal) People from different cultures have different communication 
patterns. Some assume a high context while others assume a low one; some prefer 
indirectness while others communicate directly; some observe formal protocols 
while others like informal communication.

7 Modes of thinking (deductive–inductive) People from different cultures have dif-
ferent patterns of thinking. Some tend to perform logical reasoning while others 
are grounded in their experiences.

Rosinski (2003) emphasizes that, ‘by integrating the cultural dimension, coaching 
will unleash more human potential to achieve meaningful objectives’ and, thereby 
‘enriched with coaching, intercultural professionals will be better equipped to fulfil 
their commitment to extend people’s worldviews, bridge cultural gaps, and enable 
successful work across cultures’ (p. xviii). Appreciating and understanding cultures is 
important not only in coaching, but also in counselling and supervision (Sue and Sue, 
1990; Ryde, 2000).

So how useful are these typological approaches to the cultural classification of 
difference for leveraging individual learning in diverse settings? There are many prob-
lems with such approaches, not least that we live in a hybrid world, an eclectic mix. in 
terms of ethnicity, we find individuals who display many of the cultural and ritualistic 
behaviours and attitudes of their country of origin, even though they may be of 



100 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

 different ethnicity. For instance, there are Chinese businesspeople operating out of 
China who have been educated in europe or America (Law et al., 2009). We live in a 
world where an increasing number of people are of mixed parentage or of dual heri-
tage. Therefore, faiths and beliefs may also derive from the cultural heritage. These 
are observed in a great variety of ways, and the commonality of beliefs and behaviours 
may be greater at the boundaries between different faiths than within each one.

Professional cultures are identified through traditional functionality, which is 
 usually ring-fenced by professional governing bodies. However, professionals have 
been forced to merge and disseminate their skill sets – for example, doctors to nurses, 
professionals to technicians – in order to compete effectively and to add value for 
money to their services. So people with professional knowledge and skills may not be 
members of the profession. This is why typological approaches produce a false sense 
of absolute categorization and only serve to give us another boundary to cross. They 
are attractive because they offer ‘fixed’ knowledge and expertise (albeit a pseudo-
knowledge set) as a way to advance interpersonal development – rather than offering 
a process designed to engage individuals in the identification of their emergent self 
and context of operation. Although such approaches have some value as general 
background information, many find their usefulness to consist in a literal application 
and endorsement of fixed knowledge or stereotypes.

environmental pressure to make sense of what we see immediately on the basis of 
retrospective choices – playing safe, being aware of the here and now, taking action 
and moving to closure (to ‘tick the box’) – takes precedence over a more reflective 
process, which explores new modes of vertical categorization, distinguished by the 
maturity of the process. our tendency to draw a closure in our engagement can be 
understood from the perspective of the gestalt theories (developed in europe); but 
such theories cannot explain the personal and collective history, or any variation in 
meaning and significance within the wider environment (until they embody the 
holistic philosophy from the east). The application of mindfulness in the West is a 
good example of such a half-baked cake: it utilizes the meditation techniques from the 
eastern tradition (Buddhism) very well, but it offers neither an understanding of nor 
acknowledgement of the essence of its philosophy (such as the value of compassion) 
that underpins its practice (Law, 2011, 2012). Thus we may have a model that 
encourages individual understanding of the past through the urgency of the present 
and the processing of a structured framework that is intertwined with Western accul-
turated behavioural processes; it may gloss over the deeper principle that provides a 
foundation.

it seems to me that there is a tension between similarities and differences in cul-
tures, even within an organization. in addressing the diversity of the organization 
(which has been discussed at some length in Chapter 5), many more questions may 
be asked: ‘Can people transform the workplace by expressing their cultural values 
rather than giving them up?’ ‘Can cultural differences be regarded as if they reflected 
fundamentally the same thing at some deeper level?’ Resolving the tension and 
addressing some of these questions is important for our development of a universal 
framework, if such a framework is to be applicable across cultures. if we can find 
something that is cross-culturally the same, we may also be able to discover the human 
condition we all share. The human condition may serve as an anchor for us working 
across cultures.



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 101

Like many of the cultural models that have been reviewed, the UiF accepts that 
culture is multi-layered. However, it emphasizes the unique aspects of every interven-
tion, as all behaviour changes and value shifts are contextualized but not automatically 
transferable. one solution does not fit all; and the person who knows most about 
their environment is the person who experiences it constructively, being supported 
and challenged by his or her coach and mentor. Working with individuals to identify 
differences and celebrate the uniqueness of all situations and circumstances reflects 
real universality and encourages best-fit solutions.

Coach/Mentor/Mentee Fluidity

Coaching and mentoring training sessions have traditionally focused on the 
development of coaches and mentors. in the UiF model, coachees and mentees are 
also trained as coaches and mentors, so they are better able to drive the coaching or 
mentoring process. Having the experience of being a coachee or mentee, one would 
know the whole process – and what elements in it need to be optimized if the benefits 
are to be realized. individuals are encouraged to be both coachees (or mentees) and 
coaches (or mentors) so that they may recognize the learning opportunities involved 
in both roles and identify both as transitory – as an aid to learning rather than set and 
‘boxed-in’ positions. it is essential to learning that leaders experience both roles. This 
is also consistent with the so-called ‘double-loop learning’ in organizations (Argyris, 
1977).

Language may impose psychological barriers around these roles. The role of coach 
or mentor suggests that this might be a driving role, linked with an action-centred 
approach; but in reality the coachee’s or mentee’s role is the one that drives. Hence 
coachees’ and mentees’ training is important in helping individuals maximize their 
opportunities for learning; and there is some evidence that simply having to find a 
coach or mentor is useful for development and for developing the coaching contract 
that follows.

Integrative Continuum

As discussed in Chapter 4, some schools of thought encourage the separation of 
 mentoring from coaching, stressing the distinction between the personal and the 
 performative. However, a rigid distinction might cause mentoring to be marginalized 
in the organization’s business agenda and distanced from personal development.

despite some differences between coaching and mentoring, within the UiF coach-
ing and mentoring are regarded as an integrative continuum. Both coaching and 
mentoring are underpinned by the same set of skills. For example, when coachees and 
mentees are driving a goal-centred process in an exploratory way, the outcome of 
both mentoring and coaching is ‘action’ (which is also the outcome of the learning 
process, as described in Chapter 3).

it is also in the interest of sustainability and of embedding mentoring and coaching 
as a holistic approach that the connections with the core business and central systems 
and processes are emphasized. Linking personal development with a performance 



102 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

improvement underpinned by the same set of skills enables users to develop a more 
coherent integrated framework of their own. This ensures that coaching and men-
toring remain, by association, at the core of the business agenda and that coaching 
addresses leadership development as well as organizational improvement. The 
emphasis on the connections between coaching, mentoring and core business 
processes ensures that coaching and mentoring remain at the heart of the business 
agenda. embedding them within the organization also guarantees the latter’s sus-
tainability. if coaching were just a scheme or an initiative, one would expect it to 
be a strand of work outside the main agenda; that way it would be vulnerable in a 
world of changing priorities. organizations are more likely to discontinue add-on 
schemes or programmes that are not well embedded within core processes. 
Sustainability is achieved through an integrated approach, which ensures that men-
toring and coaching are part of the way the organization supports reform and 
develops leaders. The link between coaching, mentoring, personal development 
and performance improvement has to be established in an integrated framework 
for a sustainable leadership improvement process that ensures short-term and 
longer term gains.

Cross-Cultural Emotional Intelligence

Although the idea of emotional intelligence (ei) was made popular by Goleman 
(1995), the concept was not new; it goes back to the 1920s through Thorndike’s 
(1920) work on social intelligence. Gardner (1983) argued for intrapersonal and 
interpersonal intelligence as alternative attributes of individual achievement. A formal 
definition of ei was developed by Salovey and Mayer (1990) and later re-elaborated 
in this form:

the ability to perceive emotions, to access and generate emotions so as to assist thought, 
to understand emotions and emotional knowledge, and to reflectively regulate emotions 
so as to promote emotional and intellectual growth. (Mayer and Salovey, 1997: 197)

Petrides and Furnham (2001: 64) define ei as

a constellation of emotion-related dispositions and self-perceived abilities representing a 
distinct composite construct at the lower levels of hierarchical personality structures.

Self-efficacy is also one of the motivation mobilizers at our disposal, which have been 
shown to impact on our likely success (Bandura, 1977, 1982, 1997). We can get 
sponsorship and support from others, including stakeholders, who might encourage 
us, invest their time and energy, and then benefit from our learning achievements. We 
can also discover the learning methods that will suit us, and we can plan to achieve our 
goals so as to own them and the methods we employ. We need benchmarks and a clear 
vision of what success looks and feels like if we are to stay motivated and on track.

‘Self-efficacy’ is included as one of the elements of the UiF. However, this element 
needs to be handled with care. A lot of the underlying assumptions are embedded in 
Western – more specifically, American – culture. The meaning of self-efficacy may not 



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 103

be universally relevant. Some individuals derive their sense of purpose and the power 
to get things done from a positive and yet passive life force; for others, a sense of 
destiny may be the driver; for others still, a sense of control is anathema – instead, 
harmonization and integration provide the route to holistic progress. Yet all produce 
what counts as a ‘can do’ attitude. So self-efficacy scales may measure observable or 
self-assessed outcomes, but their meaning may be far from transferable across differ-
ent cultures or contexts.

While emotion draws our attention to issues that are important to us, it may not 
be the best guide for action. Combining feeling and thinking with knowledge of 
the cultural context enables us to deliver the most effective results in our 
professional engagement. Thus the UiF was developed to embed Goleman’s 
(1998) approaches to emotional intelligence. However, although Goleman’s 
 emotional competence framework was popular, its cultural competence dimension 
was underdeveloped. The initial UiF expanded Goleman’s framework by adding 
two dimensions, cultural  competence and coaching professional competence, with 
360-degree feedback built into the system. The next section describes these 
dimensions in detail.

Integrating Cross-Cultural Coaching and Mentoring  
Intelligence into the Universal Framework

The initial UiF has four dimensions (see Figure 6.5):

1 personal competence;
2 social competence;
3 cultural competence;
4 professional competence.

Self

Social / other

Culture

Professional skills

Integrative
Professional

Figure 6.5 Universal integrated framework: a pragmatic model



104 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

The framework translates into a practical model all the elements described earlier. 
The integrative professional seamlessly crosses all the boundaries – personal and social 
(with emotional intelligence), cultural and contextual. Such a professional aims to 
help coaches and mentors to develop especially ei, and to do so from a cultural 
 perspective. This process was referred to as the cross-cultural coaching/mentoring 
and social intelligence (CMSi) in the first edition of the present book. over the years, 
i have developed and refined the same tool further, and now i simply call it ‘cultural 
and social competence (CSC)’.

A total of 18 elements of core competence have been identified within these dimen-
sions. Taking into consideration the need to balance the number of statements at each 
dimension and at each element, a total of 100 statements have been created in a form of 
self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ). The initial CSC questionnaire was referred to as 
self-review questionnaire (SRQ), and it was in binary response format – YeS/no. The 
newer version (second edition) of the questionnaire uses a seven-point Likert scale in 
response to the users’ feedback. The users are invited to choose their response according 
to whether they agree or disagree with a CSC statement by clicking the appropriate 
point on the scale; the points range from never (Point 1) to Always (Point 7).

The updated version of CSC SAQ – in a form of the online tool – is now available. 
Readers interested in trying out the CSC SAQ can contact the author. The four 
dimensions together with their elements and related statements are described next.

dimension i: Personal competence

This competence reflects how you manage yourself. it consists of two parts:

1 awareness of oneself (self-awareness);
2 management of oneself (self-regulation) / self-management.

Self-awareness
Self-awareness measures whether you accept and value yourself. it measures your 
awareness of your own internal states, feelings, emotions, cognitions, preferences, 
resources and intuitions.

ElEmEnt 1 emotion: awarEnEss of onE’s own Emotion
How self-aware are you? Check whether the general statements below could describe 
you:

•  i am at ease with myself and who i have become.
•  i worry about my shortcomings.
•  i have complete belief in how i utilize the resources and support structures i have 

in place.
•  i pay attention to what my body tells me.
•  i see myself as an intuitive person.

if you answer ‘yes’ to most of the above questions (except question 2), you would 
achieve high scores in self-awareness. The higher your score in self-awareness, the 
more aware you are of how you feel and of what you know, and the better you 
 recognize the sources of that knowledge.



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 105

ElEmEnt 2 Cognition: sElf-rEflEction and Evaluation, knowing onE’s  
own valuEs, sElf-worth, capacitiEs, strEngths and wEaknEssEs
This may be achieved by reflecting on one’s own experience analytically, critically eval-
uating the validity of one’s assumptions, beliefs, and values, and drawing conclusions. 
indicators:

•  an accurate evaluation of one’s own strengths and weaknesses;
•  intuition;
•  confidence.

For example:

•  i know my own strengths and weaknesses.
•  i can express my view that i believe something to be right even though this view 

may be unpopular.
•  i worry about my shortcomings.
•  i have complete confidence in how i utilize the resources or support structures 

i have in place.
•  i see myself as an intuitive person.

Self-management
Self-management is the ability to manage one’s emotion and motivation and to  control 
them productively. it measures whether you invite the trust of others by being princi-
pled, reliable and consistent. The self-management score has a total of 13  questions 
and is divided into resilience, flexibility and trustworthiness.

ElEmEnt 3 Motivation
Motivation is a positive emotion that drives you towards your goals or aspirations. it 
gives you the ability to perform consistently in a range of situations under pressure, to 
stick to your commitments, to take the best course of action to achieve your objective 
in the face of obstacles, personal challenge or criticism, and to manage your awareness 
of emotion and control it productively. For example, resilience measures whether you 
are able to bounce back when things go badly. Realism measures whether you balance 
optimism with realism. indicators:

•  ambition;
•  achievement;
•  commitment to oneself, the team, the organization’s objectives;
•  standard of excellence;
•  optimism (emotional resilience) – persistence in achieving goals in spite of obstacles.

For example:

1 i actively take opportunities to set challenging tasks in order to fulfil the organiza-
tion’s mission.

2 i get despondent or depressed fairly easily.
3 i am a very resilient person in hard times.



106 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

4 i always build in contingencies so that i can increase the likelihood of a good 
outcome.

5 i believe that when one door closes another opens.

ElEmEnt 4 Control
Control is the ability to deal with disruptive emotions and impulses. it measures 
whether you are emotionally balanced, namely whether you are free to express your 
feelings but able to decide whether, how and when you do so. For example:

1 i am able to show how i feel as well as to conceal my feelings.
2 When i am upset or cross i have a compulsion to let it our no matter what.
3 i can express my feelings easily, but i choose when and how to do it.
4 i keep calm when others are angry.
5 When i am angry or upset i tend to take it out on others.

ElEmEnt 5 TrustworthinEss
Trustworthiness also means honesty or integrity. it measures whether you invite the 
trust of others by being principled, reliable and consistent. For example:

1 i confront unethical actions in others.
2 My beliefs and attitudes shift depending on whom i am with.
3 i know what my inner principles are.
4 if i make a mistake i might try to blame it on others.
5 i am true to myself even if i risk disapproval from others.

ElEmEnt 6 ConsciEntiousnEss
Conscientiousness takes care of personal improve ment and performance. For example:

1 i do not always make commitments.
2 i do not always keep my promises.
3 i hold myself accountable for getting the job done.
4 i am well organized in my work.
5 i pay attention to detail in my work.

ElEmEnt 7 FlExibility
Flexibility measures whether you are able to adapt your thinking and behaviour to 
match changing situations. Key questions include:

•  do you inquire into and respond openly to others’ ideas?
•  Could you address your own fear of losing what is familiar and try something new, 

rather than playing safe?

Self-assessed statements include:

1 i can perform multi-tasking well.
2 once i’ve made my decision i stick to it no matter what.
3 i particularly like to learn new ways of doing things.



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 107

4  i find unexpected changes unsettling.
5  it’s easy for me to adjust my responses to changing conditions.

ElEmEnt 8 CrEativity
Creativity consists in being innovative, comfortable with new ideas and novel applica-
tions. Self-assessed statements include:

1 i am creative.
2 i am open to new ideas.
3 i enjoy doing new things.
4 i like novel solutions to problems.
5 i can generate a lot of new ideas easily.

dimension ii: Social competence

Social competence reflects how you manage relationships. it is a didactic process, as indi-
viduals gain insight through social interaction and awareness of others. This social process 
simply could not exist individually (Senge, 1990). it consists of the following elements:

•  awareness of others (empathy);
•  management of others (social skills).

Awareness of others (empathy)
Awareness of others’ feelings, needs and concerns measures whether you empathize 
with others. There are 20 questions.

ElEmEnt 9 UndErstanding and trust
This is an ability to see things from the perspective of others, to understand key issues, 
to see the whole picture and to draw a clear conclusion when presented with incom-
plete or ambiguous information. This ability measures whether you trust others, but 
it also protects you from being exploited. Self-assessed statements include:

1 i find it difficult to understand people who have opposite feelings or beliefs to my own.
2 i aim to accept people rather than judge them.
3 i feel empathy with others easily.
4 i tend to be suspicious of other peoples’ motives.
5 i incline to trust others in a way that allows me to be aware of the risks.

ElEmEnt 10 empowEring
To empower others is to help them develop to the point where they can satisfy their 
needs and achieve their aspirations. indicators:

•  customer-centredness;
•  service orientation.

Self-assessed statements include:

1 i help others to achieve their aspirations.
2 i help foster others’ skills.



108 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

3 i provide my subordinates with assignments that are challenging.
4 i reward others’ accomplishments.
5 i provide constructive feedback.

Management of others (social skills)
Social skills cover the ability to influence others, collaborate and cooperate with them 
by identifying a common ground and shared objectives, by taking a leadership role, 
by managing team spirit, by resolving any conflicts and by communicating clearly, 
with a display of interpersonal sensitivity.

ElEmEnt 11 Communication
Communication is about listening to others’ points of view and providing clear and 
 convincing messages about one’s position and rationale. Self-assessed statements include:

1 i listen well.
2 i am receptive to good news, but not to bad news.
3 i find giving clear, precise and concise messages difficult.
4 i welcome the sharing of information appropriately.
5 i like to create an open communicative environment.

ElEmEnt 12 Facilitating conflict rEsolution
This element measures how well you can balance the requirement to be assertive – to 
stand up for what you want – with staying calm and respecting others while you do it. 
it helps mentees and coachees to handle conflict. The coaches and mentors engage 
the emotional and social aspects when confronting conflicts. These include:

•  an ability to persuade others to change their viewpoints;
•  negotiating;
•  resolving disagreements;
•  relationship management – building bonds, nurturing relationships;
•  collaboration and cooperation – identifying a common ground; working with 

others to achieve common objectives.

Self-assessed statements include:

1 i can disagree with people regularly without falling out with them.
2 i prefer to use indirect influence to build consensus.
3 i prefer win–win solutions to conflicts.
4 i seek agreement from all stakeholders in conflict situations.
5 i readily collaborate or cooperate with others to work towards shared goals.

ElEmEnt 13 LEadErship facilitation
This consists of providing guidance and inspiration to individuals and groups. Self-
assessed statements include:

1 i coach by example.
2 i articulate coaching objectives well.
3 i generate enthusiasm for a shared vision.
4 i guide others to perform according to their abilities.
5 i would hold others accountable for their duties.



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 109

ElEmEnt 14 Coaching thE tEam
This activity consists of creating synergy in team or group coaching in order to achieve 
collective objectives. Self-assessed statements include:

1 i create synergy in order to work towards group goals.
2 i create a model of team qualities.
3 i generate enthusiasm within a team.
4 i engage all members of a team in active participation.
5 i readily gain credit among the team members.

ElEmEnt 15 Coaching for changE
To coach for change is to champion change and modernization. Self-assessed state-
ments include:

1 i encourage coaches to take action to champion change.
2 i help coaches to identify the need for change in their organization.
3 i help coaches to take action to remove barriers to change.
4 i engage others in the process of changing.
5 i create a model of change according to others’ expectations.

dimension iii: Cultural competence

This competence reflects how we manage organizational change. it consists of the 
following elements:

•  awareness of other cultures (being enlightened);
•  management of organizational cultures (being a diversity champion).

Cultural competence measures the extent to which coachees and mentees inquire 
into or respond openly to others’ culture, ideas and values, and their willingness to 
challenge and question their own assumptions as well as those of others. Coaches and 
mentors have the ability to mediate boundaries between cultures, connect to others’ 
and their own culture. in doing so one experiences oneself as part of a larger, collective 
consciousness, both culturally and spiritually. one recognizes that collective aware-
ness and morality transform the organization and society as a whole.

Awareness of other cultures (enlightenment)
This includes:

•  cultural awareness: understanding the organization’s and group’s culture and 
politics and the power relationships across culture;

•  cultural sensitivity: assesses whether you are culturally comfortable with yourself 
and with others from different backgrounds;

•  cultural flexibility: measures whether you align yourself with euro-centric or 
African/eastern values.

ElEmEnt 16 ApprEciation
Appreciation in this context relates to other cultures and religions. Self-assessed 
 statements include:

1 We all have to struggle. i wonder why it is so different for people from other 
cultures.



110 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

2 i make an effort to learn some of the languages of those in my community who 
speak something other than Standard english.

3 i have interest in different types of ethnic cultures.
4 i have interest in different types of organizational cultures.
5 i can articulate aspects of my own culture and background.
6 i cannot articulate distinguishing aspects of organizational cultures.
7 i can identify goodness and badness accurately across cultures.
8 i do not have an appreciation of the role of education, money, values and status 

across cultures.
9 i have an understanding of how my own background and culture is seen by others.

ElEmEnt 17 REspEct
Similarly, showing respect relates in this context to what is different in others cultures. 
Statements include:

1 i respect people from other cultures.
2 i relate well to people from various backgrounds and cultures.
3 i recognize that most black minority and individuals from ethnic backgrounds 

want to be treated just as those in the majority culture.
4 i believe that the majority culture should help staff of different backgrounds be 

assimilated into it.
5 i believe there is one unitary model of coaching and mentoring that suits all.
6 i believe there are many different options for different people.
7 i accept that individuals outside the majority culture may face disadvantage.
8 i recognize that individuals are more likely to choose leaders from groups of 

people who most resemble themselves.
9 i believe that individuals from minority backgrounds are less likely to have  negative 

views about other minority groups than individuals from the majority culture.
10 i feel insecure when i speak to people from a different background to mine.

Management of organizational cultures (champion)
ElEmEnt 18 Championing Equality and divErsity
This element elicits high performance from people from different cultures and back-
grounds. one contributes one’s voice to a collective endeavour. Statements include:

1 i see diversity as an opportunity to increase the performance of my organization 
and of society at large.

2 i create an environment where people from diverse cultural backgrounds can excel 
and achieve their potential.

3 i am not personally responsible for the policies of racist institutions.
4 When the chance occurs, i take a positive stand against racism, even possibly at 

some risk.
5 i take positive steps to implement discussions in coaching and mentoring that aim 

at understanding and at the elimination of racism, sexism, and ageism.

The elements and dimensions presented above are summarized in Tables 6.2 and 6.3.
The 18 elements are comparable with Petrides and Furnham’s (2001) 15 compo-

nents of trait ei, which is summarized in Table 6.4:



Table 6.2 dimensions of UiF pragmatic model

Competence
I. Personal  
(Self)

II. Social 
(Other)

III. Cultural 
(Culture)

IV. Professional 
(Competence)

Awareness Self-awareness empathy enlightenment Reflective practice
Management Self-regulation Social skills Champion Continued professional 

development

Table 6.3 elements of cross-cultural ei

Dimensions Elements Qs

i. Personal competence 1. emotion 5
2. Cognition 5
3. Motivation 5
4. Control 5
5. Trustworthiness 5
6. Conscientiousness 5
7. Flexibility 5
8. Creativity 5

ii. Social competence  9. Understanding 5
10. empowering 5
11. Communication 5
12. Facilitating conflict resolution 5
13. Leadership facilitation 5
14. Coaching the team 5
15. Coaching for change 5

iii. Cultural Competence 16. Appreciation 10
17. Respect 10
18. Champion cultural diversity 5

Total 100

Table 6.4 Petrides and Furnham’s (2001) 15 components of trait ei

Facets Perception

Adaptability flexible to adapt to new conditions
Assertiveness willing to stand up for one’s rights
emotion expression able to communicate one’s feeling to others
emotion management able to influence others’ feelings
emotion perception clear about one’s own and others’ feelings
emotion regulation able to control one’s emotions
impulsiveness (low) able to hold back one’s urges
Relationship skills able to have fulfilling personal relationships
Self-esteem successful and confident
Self-motivation able to drive on in the face of adversity
Social competence able to network with excellent social skills
Stress management able to regulate stress and withstand pressure
Trait empathy able to take others’ perspectives
Trait happiness cheerful and satisfied with one’s life
Trait optimism able to ‘look on the bright side’ of life

http://www.nsc.leadership-development.org/csrv2/index.php?type=1&section=17
http://www.nsc.leadership-development.org/csrv2/index.php?type=1&section=20
http://www.nsc.leadership-development.org/csrv2/index.php?type=1&section=26
http://www.nsc.leadership-development.org/csrv2/index.php?type=1&section=29


112 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

Petrides and Furnham’s framework consists of overlapping elements, which are not 
logically distinct. Furthermore, like other ei tools, their framework left the cultural 
component undeveloped. The ei elements are better organized in a hierarchical 
structure, as exemplified by the pragmatic UiF.

dimension iV: Professional competence

The final section reviews some of your knowledge and approaches as a coach or men-
tor. This professional dimension has an impact on coaching and mentoring outcomes. 
it requires coaches and mentors to adopt professional approaches, giving and seeking 
authentic feedback to and from others. Statements include:

1 i believe people have their own solutions and they just have to find them.
2 i believe a coach or mentor can also be a coachee or mentee.
3 i recognize the importance of goals and expectations in checking to help a coach 

to progress.
4 i am comfortable with silence.
5 i listen more and say less.
6 i keep most of my interventions for challenging questioning.
7 i often find myself interrupting the mentor or coach.
8 i always offer advice to coachees and mentees on how to improve their 

situation.
9 i stick to the rules of my chosen coaching approach at all times.

10 i can summarize accurately what the coachee or mentee is saying.
11 i tell people if they are not fit for the coaching process.
12 i rely on my own judgement about whether the relationship is working well.
13 i need to have knowledge of the individual/organizational culture before i begin 

a mentoring relationship.
14 i need to be aware of the expectations of other stakeholders when questioning/

exploring the perspective of an individual mentee or coachee.
15 i facilitate the process for mentees or coachees by reviewing their learning.
16 i do not question coachees or mentees on their understanding of the process of 

change they are experiencing.
17 i encourage mentees or coachees to experiment with their learning.
18 i hook mentees or coachees into useful networks.
19 i do not encourage individuals to review their expectations.
20 i initiate discussions on how the mentoring or coaching relationship will work.

The pragmatic model described above embeds the psychology of learning. it is 
 consistent with other meta-frameworks in learning and development; but the model 
grows wider, extending social aspects to cultural competence – for example, compare 
Taylor, Marienau and Fiddler’s (2000) development intention framework (see 
Table 6.5).

The statements provide indicators for respondents to assess their own intention to 
develop and thereby to improve their future performance. By completing the test, the 
participants become more aware of how they feel and construct knowledge.



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 113

Feedback Mechanism: Peer Rating 360-Degree Feedback

To complete the learning cycle within the dynamic coaching and mentoring model 
(Figure  6.1), the process needs to embed a feedback mechanism. Feedback from 
others can have an impact on one’s learning and understanding. This is traditionally 
illustrated by means of the Johari window (Figure 6.6). Coaches and mentors aim to 
provide feedback to coachees and mentees and to help them to discover their own 
blindspots and transfer their awareness from the known to the unknown (Luft, 1970; 
Jones and Pfeiffer, 1973).

in the initial UiF, a 360-degree feedback mechanism was developed online, which 
tested the perspectives of participants in a coaching and mentoring programme against 
those of their peers and line managers. This was a ‘systematic collection and feedback 
of performance data on an individual or group derived from a number of stakeholders 
in their performance’ (Ward, 1997). The mechanism provided a powerful opportu-
nity for the participants to gain insight into and self-awareness of their own  competence 
and to shape their behaviour accordingly.

The online UiF has a ‘welcome to the peer review’ section. Coaching and mentor-
ing colleagues can name peers to give an opinion about them on the basis of their 
behaviour. The peers can complete a scoring of the statements as follows:

1 They seem at ease with themselves.
2 They seem to accept people rather than judge them.
3 They seem able to read accurately how people are feeling.

Table 6.5 Comparison of UiF with the development intention model

UIF Development intention model

Personal competence (self-awareness) Towards knowing as dialogical process
Personal competence (self-awareness: cognition) Towards a dialogical relationship to oneself
Professional competence Towards being a continuous learner
Personal competence
(self-management)

Towards self-agency and self-authorship

Social /cultural competence Towards connection with others

I. Public
   knowledge

Known

II. Blind spot

Unknown

III. Hidden IV. Unknown

Feedback to self 

Known

Unknown

Disclosure 
to others

Figure 6.6 Giving feedback: the Johari window



114 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

4 They seem to be in tune with their own feelings.
5 They seem able to manage their stress.
6 They seem unperturbed by changing conditions.
7 They seem to be consistently themselves with different people and in different 

situations.
8 They express their feelings easily but choose when and how they do it.
9 They seem to keep calm when others are angry.

10 They tend to trust others, but in a way that allows them to be aware of the  
risks.

11 They tend to have contingencies in place to be sure of a good outcome.
12 They seem sensitive to the needs of people from a different ethnic and cultural 

background.
13 They seem to have an understanding of other cultural differences.
14 They seem comfortable with people from different backgrounds.
15 They seem to be able to motivate others to set inspirational goals for 

themselves.
16 They check how the mentoring and coaching relationship is working from the 

mentees’ and coachees’ perspective.
17 They check the resources at the coaches’ and mentees’ disposal.
18 They seem to defend their own approach when they hear a different view.
19 They use body language effectively to support their communication.

The 360-degree feedback mechanism can map onto the UiF, as shown in Figure 6.7.

Cultural

Social / other

Self

Team

PeersStaff

Manager Customers

Figure 6.7 360-degree feedback within the UiF



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 115

UIF Revisited

over the years, i continued consulting, teaching and presenting the UiF across cul-
tures wherever i went – at conferences, workshops, master classes, and so on. i have 
always invited participants’ feedback and reflected upon my work as part of my 
learning and continuous development. A number of critiques and feedback i have 
collected are summarized below:

•  While it may be very well to advocate that the UiF is designed to be applicable across 
cultures and that it stimulates criticism of the established european frameworks as 
euro-centric, the structure of the UiF itself (the onion-shaped model) places the con-
cept of self at the centre of the framework. is this rather euro-centric (self-centred) also?

•  The four dimensions need not be arranged in the order of the layers, as presented 
in Figure 6.5. in fact they can be presented as a table (like Table 6.2), or even as 
a list (as they are described in the text). in other words, the model is free to be 
reshaped and restructured. Furthermore, the interrelationships of these dimen-
sions and elements (variables) change from culture to culture.

•  While it seems a very novel project to develop a framework that is ‘universal’ and 
applicable across cultures, how would it work in practice? in fact in practice (as i 
observe from my students and many participants at workshops), in comparison 
with other models (like the GRoW model, which is linear and easy to follow), 
such a framework is not easy to use in coaching conversation.

in response to the feedback and reflection described above, i often invite the students 
and the participants, as an individual or group exercise, to redesign the structure of 
the UiF in such a way as to find it useful in their own context. A number of different 
models emerge. Three of the alternative configurations of the UiF are shown in 
Figures 6.8, 6.9 and 6.10 as examples.

Cultural

Social / other

Self

Professional
(respect*)

Performance
of coaching

Growth

Figure 6.8 Universal integrated framework: reconfiguration (Group 1). *Respect is 
perceived as part of the professional component.



116 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

The reason why i show these figures here is that they demonstrate some interesting 
perspectives in response to the critiques discussed earlier. These are:

1 Group 1: The concept of self The self may be perceived as an entity within the same 
area of cyclical–mutual influences as the others/society, culture and the professional 
elements. Culture as indicated here provides a point of entry for the growth of a 
person, organization, or community; and coaching is perceived as a vehicle to 
leverage this point of entry (see Figure 6.8).

2 Group 2: The concept of culture Some groups place culture entirely outside the 
model, while the professional element is at the centre of the intersection between 
self and others, psychological and physical factors. Culture is viewed as a part of 
the space and environment that has no boundaries (see Figure 6.9).

Psychological

Professional Individual

Culture

Social

Physical

Figure 6.9 Universal integrated framework: reconfiguration (Group 2)

Personality
genes

Self

Choice

Lifespan
role

Culture /
society

Interpersonal
relationship

Figure 6.10 Universal integrated framework: reconfiguration (Group 3)



 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework 117

3 Group 3: The notion of free choice in relation to self and others The other group 
views the concept of self as falling entirely outside the model, the socio-cultural 
relationship, and so on (see Figure  6.10). interestingly, this group places the 
notion of ‘choice’ at the centre of the model – indicating that it is the choice (or 
the fact that one is free to choose) that makes all the difference in the world!

it may be a good idea for you (the reader) to try this exercise yourself and see if you 
would come up with a different model of the UiF – this would then become your 
own coaching model.

Here, by way of offering another example, i’m making an attempt to rearrange 
the shape and components of the framework according to the learning culture that 
we have reviewed (in Chapter 3) and to apply a systems approach in a logical way, 
Figure 6.11 shows such an integrative system. From this figure we can see that the 
system in question is an integrative learning system (iLS), which is regarded as the 
updated version of the UiF (UiF/iLS).

in response to the problem of the difficulties of applying UiF in practice, i have 
restructured the tools and exercises according to the four dimensions presented in 
the next two chapters. You are invited to practise these techniques and exercises as 
often as you can, so that you apply them seamlessly, without worrying about follow-
ing manuals or procedures. Remember that UiF/iLS is a flexible framework: it is a 
spatial model like a compass, which you can ‘hold in your head’ and use to guide your 
practice, rather than following rigidly a procedural model like GRoW.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

in this chapter the initial version of the universal integrated framework (UiF) was 
described in full. The UiF embeds international cultural dimensions and emotional 
intelligence. The framework looks like an onion, with many layers: self, social, cultural 
and professional. its core – self- and social development – is grounded in the learning 
theories described in Chapter 3. it is consistent with the psychology of learning, 

Social

Self Other

Professional

Integrative learning system (ILS)

Cultural / Environment

Figure 6.11 Revised UiF: an integrative learning system



118 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

where coachees or mentees and coaches or mentors are all learners within the process. 
during their engagement, these people learn how to:

•  learn;
•  reflect;
•  become emotionally aware;
•  engage in dialogue;
•  give and receive feedback;
•  evaluate themselves.

The UiF model has been critically reviewed and, on the basis of feedback and reflec-
tion, an alternative model is proposed: UiF/iLS. A communication method of imple-
menting the framework online using internet technology is also described. The UiF 
questionnaire, with its 360-degree feedback, can be viewed as a snapshot – or a knife 
slicing through an onion. it enables participants to review their learning across all four 
dimensions.

The impact assessment of individuals’ performance and satisfaction is a key to real-
izing the benefits of coaching and mentoring. it ensures that coaching and mentoring 
offer value to the business. its implementation will be described in a case study in 
Chapter 9, and its impact assessment forms part of the evaluation strategy discussed 
in Chapter 10.

The next two chapters describe some of the technical know-how in terms of tools 
and exercises, so that you can continue to develop yourself as a competent coach, 
mentor, learner or supervisor.



The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Techniques and Tools

Introduction

This chapter provides you with a set of tools and techniques that are appropriate for the 
psychology of learning and the universal integrated framework elaborated in the previous 
chapters. Some of the practical exercises related to these techniques are described in 
Chapter 8; they can be used as an aid in coaching, mentoring and self-learning.

different practitioners would have different approach orientations depending on 
their background, experience, perspectives and training. Broadly speaking, there are 
two types of technique. Techniques that emphasize outcome are task-focused or goal-
oriented; the others emphasize psychological intervention and transpersonal quality. 
The two types are culturally bound. Western cultures tend to be goal-oriented, while 
eastern cultures tend to adopt transpersonal approaches (e.g. gestalt psychology 
and storytelling). So, apart from the fact that the two criteria of being general and 
cross-cultural are met, specific techniques have been selected in the search for the 
appropriate approaches for inclusion. These techniques are designed to help you

•  identify the sources of barriers along the coaching journey;
•  build your own meta-model;
•  combine multiple techniques and apply them in appropriate situations;
•  structure a coaching conversation;
•  conduct coaching in one-to-one as well as one-to-many group situations.

i shall structure these techniques according to the components of the integrative 
learning system (iLS) described in Chapter 6. These are:

•  related to self: developing your self-awareness, emotion and cognition;
•  social or related to the interaction between self and others: the social context in 

coaching or mentoring;

7



120 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

•  cultural: techniques that are sensitive to one’s own and the others’ culture;
•  professional: techniques that are useful for continuous professional development 

(this component continues in the next chapter).

Let’s look at these in turn.

Tools for Developing the System of the Self

in order to identify tools and techniques that can help coachees to develop the 
dimension related to their self, we need first to understand the structure of the self. 
Applying the systems approach as discussed in Chapter 6, we can expand the self, 
which is a component, and treat it as a system in its own right. Figure 7.1 provides a 
map for the self regarded as a system and its subsystems or components. These are:

•  the head, which contains the five sensory receptors and the brain, where our 
thoughts and emotions are processed;

•  the body, which is the seat of physical action and reaction (movements, behaviours 
and so on).

Perception, cognition, emotion and physical reactions are the four basic components 
that influence our behaviour in response to the environment. All these components 
(including behaviour and the environment) interact with and affect each other. Small 
changes in any one area can lead to changes in other areas. For example, thoughts and 
beliefs:

Cognition 
Behaviours Emotion

Physical 
reactions 

Environment

Head

Body

Self

schema

ILS

Sensory 
receptors

Figure 7.1 Head and body: five aspects of your life experience



 Techniques and Tools 121

•  can help define the emotion we experience;
•  can affect our physiological responses;
•  can influence how we behave, what we choose to do and not to do, and the 

quality of our performance.

environmental influences help determine the attitudes, beliefs, and thoughts that 
develop in childhood and often persist into adulthood. To overcome a challenge that 
the environment presents to us and to find a solution to a problem, one must first 
perceive the situation (which can be described as a group of stimuli) and then become 
aware of that perception and of the sensation associated with it. Thus self-awareness 
is the first step in any intervention in the world.

Tools for developing your self-awareness and for managing  
your emotion: gestalt approaches

Gestalt practitioners regard ‘self-awareness’ as a key to self-regulation and personal 
growth (Perls, 1969). There are many ways (gestalt techniques) in which, if one 
 practices often, one can increase one’s self-awareness (Perls, 1973). Active experimen-
tation has that effect. Gestalt approaches provide some simple, yet powerful tools for 
the coaching process. This is evidenced by the fact that numerous articles on gestalt 
coaching have been published since this book’s first edition (Gillie, 2009; Simon, 
2009; Magerman and Leahy, 2009). in this section i shall describe some of the 
classical techniques, but first let’s examine some background information about 
gestalt psychology.

Gestalt theory initially came from our understanding of how the brain operates, 
processes information and determines structural groupings. The idea was first put 
forward by Max Wertheimer in 1912 (Hergenhan and olson, 1997). The need 
to categorize and organize our perceptual information – for example, in terms of 
proximity, similarity, closure, simplicity, or separation of the ‘figure’ from its ‘ground’ – 
is well known (Koffka, 1935). The focus of the theory is the idea of ‘grouping’: the 
characteristics of certain stimuli cause us to structure or interpret a visual field or 
problem in a particular way. The primary factors that determine grouping or its laws 
of organization are:

•  proximity: elements tend to group together according to their nearness;
•  similarity: items similar in some respect tend to group together;
•  closure: items are grouped together if they tend to complete some entity;
•  simplicity: items will be organized into simple figures according to symmetry, regu-

larity, and smoothness.

However, there have been some recent developments that suggest that there are other 
ways in which we categorize, in addition to the laws of gestalt. it seems that, rather 
than having a central storage area in the brain, we have a gateway to storage, and 
thereafter memory, emotion and facts about an event, where circumstances may be 
stored. This means that we are less restricted by gestalt categories of structural repre-
sentation than we first thought: there are more processes working to fill the gaps in 
our perception.



122 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

More recently a deeper structural view has been developed. This view involves 
changes in the functional meaning, the grouping and other characteristics of the 
items. directed by what the structure of a situation requires for a crucial region of the 
brain to be activated, one is led to a reasonable prediction, which, like other parts of 
the structure, calls for verification, whether direct or indirect. Two directions are 
involved: getting a whole, consistent picture (top-down processing, driven by the 
internal cognition) and seeing what the structure of the whole requires for the parts 
(bottom-up processing, data-driven). in general, the theory offers some useful expla-
nations about the interaction between individuals and the environment.

The humanistic–transpersonal revolution in psychology (for instance, the human 
potential movement) has provided gestalt psychology with a ‘quantum leap’ onto the 
platforms of philosophy and practice. Like with many other useful approaches in Western 
culture – such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and narrative approaches – its 
earlier applications were found in therapeutic settings, for instance those pioneered by 
Fritz Perls. However, Perls was also influenced by Zen Buddhism, which is a form of 
meditation that aims to achieve a state of mind characterized by purposelessness (wu 
hsin). in this state, one retains consciousness and at the same time lets go of it all. The 
practitioner watches the ebbs and flows of his or her consciousness without being car-
ried away. Gestalt techniques resonate with meditation exercises that can be practised in 
everyday life. This creates an opportunity to make every waking moment an occasion 
for personal growth (see the gestalt exercises in Chapter 8). As a result, the gestalt 
approach is firmly grounded in its attitude and practice. This resonates with eastern 
philosophy rather than with the familiar pair of theory and practice, which have been 
dominant in Western societies. in this sense, the gestalt approach is both transpersonal 
and cross-cultural. This combination makes it unique among many techniques, since it 
is built to a large extent on intuitive understanding rather than on theory.

The transpersonal aspect of gestalt approach

Unlike other transpersonal frameworks, which emphasize the collective unconscious, 
gestalt approaches focus on the primacy of awareness. For gestalt practitioners, aware-
ness itself associates the transpersonal with the visionary realm. Awareness is transper-
sonal and spiritual; it awakes as a result of the transpersonal impinging on the personal 
beyond the ‘spiritual state’ (the environment). it is thus conceptually more accurate 
to describe gestalt techniques as ‘transpersonal’ rather than ‘humanistic’, as they are 
commonly known (naranjo, 1993).

A gestalt approach has the following characteristics:

•  an act of expression that stretches one’s awareness;
•  the presence of a witness, which enhances attention (in the narrative approach, it 

enhances resonance);
•  the presence of interpersonal relationships: it should be at least a one-to-one inter-

action, which is what defines the coaching and mentoring processes (in this sense 
the coach and coachee are co-creating the present);

•  organicity: like in a dance, coaches and coachees freely move their attention from 
one issue to another rather than according to a set of procedures or formulae 
(compare CBT approaches).



 Techniques and Tools 123

The gestalt approach is relevant in the twenty-first century not so much for its 
therapeutic application, but rather in coaching. in the previous chapters you have 
learnt that it is the personal relationship between coaches and coachees that is impor-
tant in the coaching process.

Translating gestalt psychology into coaching can be summarized in the formula:

= + −Gestalt coaching (awareness coaching support)coach coachee relationship

The primacy of present-centred attitudes

Coaching is an interactive process. in this process, gestalt coaching can be defined 
as the transmission of experience from coaches to coachees. it is based on the 
assumption that experience can be passed on. This depends on an implicit attitude: 
the Weltanschauung (world-view) or philosophical posture of the coaches, who 
transmit the quality of the coaching experience to their coachees. This is communi-
cated by means of a set of exercises, without any need to explain them. Thus gestalt 
psychologists talk about using oneself as an instrument. Coaches are like artists who 
transform through their art. in this context, the content of the transformation tran-
scends the instruments (coaches) through other instruments (coachees), in a form 
of expression (in coaching, this usually takes a form of conversation, but in gestalt 
coaching it may take the form of mindfulness exercises). in other words, gestalt psy-
chologists value action more than words and experience more than thought  during 
the coach–coachee interaction: action speaks louder than words. Gestalt coaches 
also share some of the qualities of counsellors: for instance, they are non- judgemental. 
This entails the positive acceptance of a person: there are no good or bad people, 
only their behaviour, response or performance in the context of executive 
coaching.

Thus gestalt practitioners make the following distinctions:

•  being versus knowledge;
•  action versus utterance;
•  experience versus understanding;
•  effectiveness and acquisition.

However, in their practice, they attempt to blur the following boundaries:

•  feeling versus thinking;
•  intuition versus judgement;
•  awareness versus morality;
•  spontaneity versus intention.

All this is consistent with our learning wheel described in Chapter 3. Gestalt psy-
chologists regard experience as their source. Attitude is formed through reflection 
and expressed in action/style. experience is self-replicating. The ebbs and flows of 
experience ensure the continuous movement of the learning wheel.

Gestalt coaches regard themselves as ‘naked’ in the sense that they see their practice 
as an art form, which, like music, is communicated from heart to heart. The meaning 



124 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

of gestalt techniques is an artistic expression, an embodiment of a living understanding. 
Gestalt coaches are grounded in their living experience, from which they communicate 
their understanding through action.

Gestalt psychology gives primacy to the present. Both the coaches and the coachees 
practise living in the moment. All the issues are reflected in present-centredness. 
Gestalt practitioners regard ‘present-centredness’ as a technique. Framed within the 
coaching process, present-centredness is the goal itself.

The paradoxical theory of change

The paradox of change is central to gestalt thinking. Change occurs naturally, and 
one becomes what one is (Beisser, 1970). one therefore should not (and usually 
one cannot) resist the change that takes place naturally. According to gestalt theory, 
change is a continuous learning process. The gestalt approach to change is to focus 
on the here and now – on who or what you are now. Change occurs as a natural 
phenomenon. This is illustrated in Figure 7.2 and is known as the gestalt cycle of 
the continuous flow of experience (Melnick and nevis, 2005).

According to the cycle, we become aware of our perception from our sensory input. 
A figure of interest emerges from the background within our consciousness. We direct 
our energy and effort to acting on the area of interest or concern – the point of 
contact. We concentrate our effort and attention on the contact point until we lose 
interest or the issue is resolved. Then we withdraw our effort and redirect our energy 
to the next area of interest, and so on, as the cycle repeats itself. (Can you see the 
 similarities/differences between the gestalt cycle of continuous flow of experience 
and the learning wheel?)

To repeat, in the gestalt cycle of the continuous flow of experience, change happens 
naturally; however, it can only happen in the here and now. Paying attention to what 
is in the here and now (e.g. thought, emotions, behaviour; conflicts and contradic-
tions within oneself and between people) helps us to find meaning and direction and 
to make choices. Change emerges and unfolds organically.

0. Sensation

6. Withdraw

2. Direct your 
energy

1. Aware (emergence)
a figure of interest

4. Contact

5. Resolve
(destruction)

3. Act

Figure 7.2 Gestalt cycle of continuous flow of experience: a complete cycle



 Techniques and Tools 125

The nature of resistance
When one attempts to resist change and tries to become what one is not, interruption 
or resistance occurs, which hinders development. Sometimes resistance is a form 
of defence mechanism, which appears when an interruption to the gestalt cycle of 
 experience has already occurred. if there is an interruption, resistance to an emerging 
process, and destruction of figures of interest, one gets ‘stuck’ and cannot learn or 
change. For instance, in a state of emergence, in response to fear (e.g. of being hurt), 
one may get stuck in the area of interest and fail to direct one’s energy so as to act 
accordingly. The classic example of the fear/freeze response occurs in life-threatening 
situations such as being caught in a fire. one may then experience resistance to contact 
or to the engagement with action (see Figure 7.3).

Sometimes resistance is healthy: for example, a child needs to resist the urge to have 
a tantrum, as this may incur the parents’ disapproval. Short-term resistance may even 
be desirable, such as one’s resistance to hunger until a meeting is concluded. However, 
prolonged interruption may cause a conditioned response whereby one fails to act 
appropriately: for example, one becomes reluctant to let go for fear of the withdrawal 
of love or support from another person. in cases of this sort the person gets stuck at 
the point of contact (Stage 4) and fails to allow the issue to resolve (see Figure 7.4).

Resistance or interruption causes concerns when it is unconscious and leaves unfin-
ished business (a lack of equilibrium: an incomplete gestalt). This may restrict contact 
and growth in new situations. negative experience may stand in the way of change 
and may create a blockage or interference (e.g. fear, lack of confidence, stress) due to 
cross-cultural experience. The gestalt techniques described next may be helpful in 
cross-cultural coaching.

Tackling resistance
Paradoxically, when the resistance or blockage happens during a coaching session, if 
the coach can help the coachee stay with it, this allows the coachee to experience the 
issue fully. The blockage will then dissolve naturally, after which the coachee can move 
forward. The role of the coach is to help coachees to focus on the here and now and 
see what they are doing that might be causing the psychological blockage.

0. Sensation

6. Withdraw

2. Direct your
    energy

1. Aware (emergence)
a figure of interest

4. Contact

5. Resolve
(destruction)

3. Act

Figure 7.3 The nature of resistance: interruption at the awareness stage



126 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

The gestalt coach advises coachees to stay with the ‘resistance’ until its nature 
is experienced, understood and accepted. Change can then take place. in the form of 
self-acceptance facilitated by coach, this leads to personal growth.

Gestalt techniques

in gestalt psychology there are a number of techniques and exercises intended to help 
practitioners develop a present-centred attitude and to ensure that the cycle of expe-
rience continues to flow. Techniques include:

•  suppression;
•  expression;
•  integration.

The principle of these techniques is discussed in the next section; the practical  exercises 
related to them are described in the next chapter.

Suppressive techniques
Suppressive techniques are based on the principle that, if one  can stop blocking/
resisting the nature of change, change will happen. in other words, suppressive tech-
niques aim to undo what one has done wrong – to unlearn the bad habit.

The starting point of suppressive techniques is surprisingly simple: do nothing – give 
yourself an experience of nothingness.

once we accept nothingness, everything is added unto us. nothingness becomes 
a  ‘ground’ (background) against which every ‘figure’ (foreground) freely emerges. 
it also provides a foundation for self-awareness and resilience to develop.

Expressive techniques
As the name suggests, expressive techniques are the opposite of suppressive  techniques. 
While suppressive techniques aim to prevent coachees from doing something, expres-
sive techniques attempt to encourage them to initiate or complete an action. in this 
sense, the coach acts as ‘midwife’, helping to bring the hidden voice into  expression. 

0. Sensation

6. Withdraw1. Aware (emergence)
a figure of interest

4. Contact

5. Resolve
(destruction)

2. Direct your
    energy

3. Act

Figure 7.4 The nature of resistance: interruption at the point of contact



 Techniques and Tools 127

Furthermore, the gestalt coach invites coachees to maximize their expression. This 
can be achieved by providing prompts during the coaching session. For example:

•  What do you experience now?
•  Take an open posture (when the posture is closed).
•  Breathe deeply (when breathing is shallow).
•  Use the left hand to draw instead of using the right hand (or vice versa).

expressions can be intensified through:

•  simple repetition;
•  exaggeration and development;
•  explication and translation;
•  identification and acting.

The effect of asking coachees to repeat an exercise or to exaggerate their behaviour, 
voice or movement is obvious. The practice of explication, translation, identification and 
acting can be quite complex, and we shall expand on them next.

Explication and translation
There is a big difference between ‘thinking about’ a certain behaviour and empathizing 
with it. explication and translation techniques aim to help practitioners make an implicit 
expression explicit by translating non-verbal expression into words. For example:

•  Give words to your action.
•  if your tears could speak, what would they say?
•  What would your left hand say to your right hand?
•  Give a voice to your loneliness.
•  if your business were a cereal, what would it be?
•  Give your story (or the system) a name.

The process of explication leads to the desired end: interpretation. it is not the role of 
a coach to tell the coachee the meaning of his or her action. Coachees are guided to 
contact their message themselves.

Identification and acting
The techniques of identification and acting are based on the assumption that we can 
understand other people or things better by being them rather than by analysing 
them. in gestalt coaching, acting functions as a form of role play. The unique difference 
from the usual acting in this exercise is that the only ‘actor’ is the coachee her- or him-
self. Acting or taking on a different role forces one to experience oneself as another 
person. Coachees are encouraged to imagine themselves as possessing the attributes 
and actions of other beings in the here and now.

Having identified psychological barriers such as anxiety, guilt, shame or lack of 
confidence, CBT practitioners attempt to devise a strategy to overcome them. Gestalt 
coaches help coachees overcome these barriers through role play – which is like a 
rehearsal designed to overcome stage fright. Unlike psychoanalysis, the gestalt 



128 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

approach emphasizes recovery of awareness of the blockage, the feeling that one is 
doing it and the feeling of how one is doing it. Self-awareness, not introspected, can 
continue to exist after the role play. one of the functions of identification and acting 
is to undo retroflection (that is, the defensive substitution of self for environment): 
from being ‘done to’, one becomes a ‘doer’.

Techniques of integration
An interesting twist of a gestalt coaching exercise occurs when coachees are asked to 
imagine themselves in the future. The future self is brought back to the here and now. 
Acting in this special case is a way of completing one’s own (future) expression. in 
gestalt terms, the past, present and future are all ‘sub-selves’. The exercise of acting in 
and acting out brings the coachees’ ‘sub-selves’ into contact with each other by 
instructing them to play their parts and to have their characters talk to each another.

The actor identifies with the character being played. The ‘present self ’ becomes one 
with the ‘future self ’ that one is acting and recognizes the future attributes as present. 
The same role play can apply to any other characters. For example, in a three-chair 
exercise, the coach instructs the coachees by making the following suggestions:

•  image your future self sitting in the other chair [= empty: the ‘hot seat’].
•  When you move and sit in that chair, be her.
•  When you are ready, move and sit in that chair.
•  With some visualization exercise, the coachee moves to the other chair and sits down.
•  now you start speaking like her.
•  Be your future voice.

The acting out of the two selves is known as an intrapersonal encounter. Coachees are 
encouraged to switch from one chair to the other to reinforce the reality of their 
identification with alternating sub-selves. These tend to have a dialectic quality, which 
develops between ‘i should’ and ‘i want’. Perls calls these internal selves ‘top dog’ and 
‘underdog’ respectively – the ‘i should’ critic versus the hopeless ‘i want’. The ‘top 
dog’ may reflect the attitude of an influential adult or educator from the past – an 
attitude that one may not have come to terms with until the present.

The top dog/underdog dichotomy
The ‘top dog’ has the following characteristics. it is:

•  authoritarian;
•  bullying;
•  persisting;
•  primitive;
•  righteous.

The top dog tells us:

•  how we ‘should be’;
•  how inadequate we are;
•  to try harder to change.



 Techniques and Tools 129

The ‘underdog’ has the following characteristics:

•  complies half-heartedly;
•  feels guilty;
•  finds excuses;
•  passively resists;
•  says ‘yes, but…’

‘Top dog’ and ‘underdog’ are two clowns performing inefficiently and ineffectively 
on the stage of the ‘tolerant and mute self ’. The top dog–underdog dialogue is like 
an internal mediation service. one needs to invest oneself fully in each role, with 
all the uncomfortable feelings that go with it, before one can really hear the points 
put forward by the other. if one can overcome the ‘top dog–underdog’ conflict, 
integration can be achieved. The two selves come to their senses and listen to each 
other.

Dos and don’ts in gestalt coaching.
There are some dos and don’ts in the gestalt rules themselves. dos:

•  do nothing – experience nothingness.
•  Focus on the here and now.
•  Focus on what is – on who or what you are now.
•  Focus on your senses – smell, taste and so on.
•  Focus on how something is experienced.
•  experience the real.
•  Pay attention to the moment.
•  Be aware of what is going on around yourself in the present and all the time.
•  Redevelop the innate awareness of yourself and the environment.
•  Be aware of the ebb and flow of your own awareness of various sensations.
•  Stay with (or work with) any ‘resistance’. (‘Resistance’ is regarded as healthy and 

positive.)
•  encourage the externalization of the internal debate.
•  open yourself up to your environment.
•  Be receptive.
•  Trust your own nature and intuition.
•  Accept the positive experience as well as the negative (pain, imperfection and 

the like).
•  Accept who you are – ‘surrender to being’.
•  express yourself.
•  Take responsibility for your actions, feelings and thinking.
•  insist on the rule of engagement.
•  initiate action.
•  Maximize expression.
•  Choose between doing nothing (emptiness) and doing something (expression).
•  Be direct.



130 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

don’ts:

•  don’t focus on past or future.
•  don’t deal with what is absent.
•  don’t imagine.
•  don’t question why it is.
•  don’t preoccupy yourself with what it should be.
•  don’t theorize about events.
•  don’t ‘try’ to change.
•  don’t lock into one of the clients’ roles – for example, by supporting the ‘trying’ 

to change.
•  don’t work with what should be, could be or must be.
•  don’t work against ‘resistance’. (The more force one applies in order to resist, 

the harder the resistance becomes. Going with the flow may create new mindsets, 
e.g. it could take account of everyone’s needs.)

•  don’t manipulate (e.g. explain, judge, justify).
•  don’t talk ‘about…’
•  don’t emphasize ‘should’.

Managing yourself, your cognition and emotion:  
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)

According to the Special Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP) 2004 survey,  carried 
out by Palmer and Whybrow (2004), cognitive and behavioural techniques constitute the 
most common approach adopted by coaching psychologists – with a majority well over 60 
per cent. While neuro-linguistic programming (nLP) has gained popularity in life coach-
ing, it is the least used technique among professional psychologists. The theoretical under-
pinnings and techniques of nLP will not be covered here, as they are covered elsewhere 
and in the companion Practitioner’s Manual (Law, 2013).

CBT was developed by Aaron Temkin Beck, a psychiatrist working in the United 
States in the 1960s and 1970s (for examples of its clinical application, see Beck, Rush, 
Shaw and emery, 1979). The link established in CBT between emotion, cognition 
and behavioural intervention (whence the name of this technique) is based on Beck’s 
observation that individuals preoccupied with their emotional thoughts tend to talk 
to themselves – they have an ‘internal dialogue’. They may not be aware of the origin 
of their thoughts, but they usually find them disturbing, as these thoughts pop up in 
their mind without any conscious control (Beck and his team called this phenomenon 
‘automatic thought’). if individuals can become more aware of their emotions – say, 
by reporting them to a counsellor or psychologist, or by writing them down in diary 
form – they can overcome them by working out strategies, usually developed in col-
laboration with their counsellor or psychologist. Greenberger and Padesky (1995) call 
this process ‘mind over mood’ (which is different from ‘mind over matter’).

CBT belongs to the facilitative style of coaching in that coaches do not provide 
coachees with direct solutions to their problems. it is also congruent with the 
 psychology of learning approaches advocated in this book. Here too, coaching is 
regarded as a ‘collaborative process’ that corresponds, in CBT terminology, to the 
so-called ‘guided recovery’. Coaches build scaffolding to guide and support coachees 



 Techniques and Tools 131

to rediscover their signature strengths or to devise a strategy for the future – for 
example, in the form of a narrative theme or CBT structure.

in common with many coaching techniques, CBT is goal-driven and solution-
focused; it emphasizes the present and future. A typical CBT programme is limited in 
time, which partly explains its popularity with the national Health Service (nHS). 
More importantly, its explicit nature makes its outcome amenable to evidence-based 
evaluation (see Chapter 10), which is recommended as good practice in both the 
public and the private sectors in the Western world. CBT is regarded by the national 
institute for Health and Clinical excellence (niCe) as the treatment of choice, and it 
is probably one of the best treatments available (Chambless, 1988: 12; Rothbaum, 
Mesdows, Resick and Foy, 2000). Thus it has become the most popular technique 
and is widely practised in the nHS. CBT is consistent both with the philosophy of 
Socrates and with modern positive psychology. in this section it is presented as one of 
the coaching techniques that are relevant for managing cognition and emotion.

Although CBT offers evidence-based enquiry and economic constraint, its use in 
coaching and mentoring is relatively new. Cognitive behavioural coaching enables cli-
ents to identify and subsequently modify the cognitive, behavioural and emotive 
blocks that impede the execution of their goal-directed activities (neenan and Palmer, 
2001; Law, 2003).

CBT is based on the assumption that cognition has the power to influence one’s 
emotion and behaviour – ‘mind over matter’. Although, like many coaching interven-
tions, CBT focuses on the future, it does take past experience as its starting point and 
uses the present as an opportunity for planning to change. it consists of three parts, 
each one dealing with a temporal dimension:

1  the part concerned with the past reviews past achievements, experience and values;
2  the part concerned with the present assesses current thinking and feeling and 

mobilize the cognitive capacity and resources to plan for change;
3  the part concerned with the future works towards the future.

There are seven steps in applying CBT in coaching. These are:

1 setting a goal;
2 assessing the value of the goal;
3 setting SMARTeR objectives;
4 assessing the emotion of coachees;
5 identifying possible barriers or problems;
6 developing strategies to overcome barriers or problems;
7 reviewing progress.

Step 1: setting a goal
This step is consistent with the coaching process. Usually setting the goal takes place 
in the first session, when coaches and coachees meet. To identify the coachees’ goal, 
the coach attempts to establish the coachees’ aspirations, hopes and dreams. The goal 
should be ambitious, inspirational and for the long term, and it should have a sense of 
purpose whether it relates to life or to career. in executive coaching, the goal may be 
related to organizational objectives or to the coachees’ personal performance. in life 



132 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

coaching, the goal may be one’s sense of purpose, work–life balance or personal 
 relationships. There should be considerable overlap between personal and organizational 
goals, executive and life coaching. if not, coaches should draw the coachees’ attention to 
the tension that may arise as a result of the gap  between personal fulfilment and the work 
performance demanded by employers. in such cases some intervention may be required 
to achieve a work–life realignment through programmes of change.

Step 2: assessing the value of the goal
Coachees are asked to rate the attractiveness of the goal on a scale of 1 to 10. This 
resembles project appraisal in an organizational context. However, the rating is based 
on the coachees’ perception and subjective judgement. in executive coaching, the line 
manager may also be asked to provide a rating. The values of the coaches may need to 
be negotiated with the coachees and their line managers.

Step 3: seting SMARTER objectives
Coaches will help coachees to formulate a set of SMARTeR objectives from the goal. 
objectives should be:

•  Specific Coaches should describe specifically what is to be achieved.
•  Measurable Coaches should describe how one could measure the output and suc-

cessful outcomes when the obejctive has been achieved.
•  Agreed The objectives should be agreed upon by all the stakeholders. The obvious 

ones are the coachees and the coaches. in executive coaching, stakehoders may 
include the line manager of the coachees. in life coaching, the coachees may like 
to discuss these objectives with their family. Coachees and coaches may discuss 
them with their supervisors.

•  Realistic The objectives need to be realsitic: in other words, achievable. This is 
important, as coachees may feel frustrated if they fail to achieve the agreed objec-
tives. Failure may result in coachees giving up their programme prematurely.

•  Time-bound it is important for coaches and coachees to agree on a deadline by 
which the latter would acheive the set target. Coaches also need to ask coachees 
to agree on a starting date: the period of work towards achieving the set objectives 
should be well defined.

•  Evaluate and review At the end of the implementation period, coaches and 
coachees should evaluate how successfully the obejctives have been achieved and 
what impact the action has had. They should also hold a meeting to review 
progress and possibly to set future plans.

Step 4: assessing the emotion of coachees
Coaches would then ask coachees to rate their degree of confidence in achieving the 
agreed objectives; again, the rating should be on a scale of 1 to 10. This is the equivalent 
of a feasibility study of a task, but it’s done from a psychological perspective.

Step 5: identifying possible barriers or problems
Coaches should encourage coachees to look to the future and identify any possible 
barriers, problems and risks that might prevent them from achieving their objectives. 
To do this, coaches need to describe potential problems before the coachees encounter 
them. Some of the barriers may be psychological – for example, lack of self-esteem or 



 Techniques and Tools 133

confidence to do the job. neenan and Palmer (2001) refer to cognitive barriers as 
performance-interfering thinking (PiT).

Step 6: developing strategies to overcome barriers or problems
Having identified barriers or problems, coachees should be encouraged to think about 
possible solutions. Coaches may work with them to devise an action plan or strategies 
to overcome certain problems or to reduce certain risks. The coach can help the 
coachee to develop performance-enhancing thinking (PeT) instead of PiT (neenan 
and Palmer, 2001).

Step 7: reviewing progress
Coaches should have regular review meetings with their coachees, to ensure that they 
are on target. Coachees should describe the outputs and the outcome of the action 
plan. They should ask coaches to rate their progress on confidence or cognitive scales 
(as described in Step 1) on a regular basis.

The seven steps are summarized in Table 7.1.
CBT is similar to a personal development plan in the workplace. This makes it an 

ideal candidate for adoption in organizations. The major difference between CBT and 
a personal development plan is that the former focuses on emotions – such as coachees’ 
perception of their competence and confidence. Coachees need to rate their mood on 
a 1 to 10 scale. Coachees working in a technical environment may prefer to use a 
1–100% scale. This is fine, provided that the scales are used consistently throughout the 
coaching or mentoring programme. Another important feature of CBT is that coachees 
need to identify possible barriers and how to overcome them. if coachees are prepared 
for the challenge, they are more likely to succeed.

CBT can also be used to increase the coachees’ aspirations. To achieve this, coachees 
are usually guided by a coach to set a goal – for example, a coachee may wish to 

Table 7.1 Action plan adopted from cognitive behavioural techniques

Objective Start time When by
Possible 
problems

Strategies 
to overcome 
barriers or problems Progress

Recall your 
main or primary 
goal – make it 
SMARTeR

Purpose

Value

Rate 
attractiveness 
of goal
1–10 scale

Rate confidence 
of success

1–10 scale

describe the 
problem,
e.g. 
performance-
interfering 
thinking

(PiT)

describe solution,
e.g. performance-
enhancing 
thinking

(PeT)

describe output

describe outcome

Rate progress
1–10 scale

Rate confidence 
of success
1–10 scale



134 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

increase his or her self-confidence. in a self-esteem building session, the coachee is 
encouraged to think about how someone with high self-esteem behaves and achieves 
results, and to set as a goal being this type of person. one of my coachees described 
her experience of this process as ‘capturing the moment of aspiration’, and it opened 
up an opportunity to take positive action.

Practical experience suggests that, for some people, CBT works better with mind-
fulness exercises embedded as part of the process – that is, by using the gestalt 
approach suggested earlier. The mindfulness exercises serve as a vehicle to heighten 
the coachees’ awareness of their own self-limited belief and thereby to identify novel 
solutions to overcoming barriers.

Techniques that Are Sensitive to the Self and the Others’  
Culture: Narrative Approaches

narrative therapy has been systematically developed by Michael White at the dulwich 
Centre (White, 1995a, 1995b, 2006). Following a similar historical–cultural trend, 
the narrative approach has been applied in therapeutic practice and advocated 
by White as narrative therapy (White, 1995a, 1997, 2000, 2006, 2007). its clinical 
application has been widespread, like that of CBT; this is especially true of its prin-
ciple of respecting people’s stories as a route to recovery from psychotic episodes 
(Hartley, Whomsley and Clarke, 2006). However, narrative therapy was originally 
grounded in cultural anthropology (Turner and Brunner, 1986) – in particular in the 
work of Myerhoff (1980, 1982, 1986) and in the psychology of learning (Vygotsky’s 
proximal development), which are concerned with non-clinical populations with 
specific sensitivity to cross-cultural issues. i feel that it is appropriate to relocate 
 narrative applications within the mainstream area of coaching.

in Chapter 3 you learnt about constructive–developmental theories and how they 
link developmental growth to the construction of meaning. in particular, Vygotsky’s 
idea of proximal development was outlined as a possible candidate for scaffolding the 
coaching practice. This section expands on that concept and shows how it fits into 
narrative coaching.

Applying Vygotsky’s levels of learning (or distancing tasks) to coaching practice, we 
devise the following steps:

1 description: encourage coachees to characterize specific objects/events of their 
world (characterization of initiative);

2 relation and initiative in relationship: develop chains of association by establishing 
relations between these objects and events (analyses/pattern matching);

3 evaluation: reflect, draw upon your realization and learning about specific phe-
nomena from the chains of association;

4 justification: judge above the level of evaluating; abstract your realization and 
learning from their concrete and specific circumstances, to form concepts about 
life and identity;

5 conclusion/recommendation: formulate the planning for and the initiation of 
actions; predict the outcome of specific actions that are founded upon this concept 
development.



 Techniques and Tools 135

According to Michael White (2006), the narrative approach is based on the following 
assumptions:

1 Meaning shapes our lives. (See Chapter 3 for a detailed theoretical discussion of 
this principle.)

2 Life is multi-storied; it is not one single story. However, some stories become 
more prominent in a coachee’s life while other stories may be neglected, which 
might be important for that person’s development,

3 The primary meaning-making frame is the storylines. narrative practitioners 
regard the storyline given by the storyteller as a primary meaning-making frame, 
which enables her or him to construe meaning from it. in turn, this primary 
meaning derived from the storyline gives meaning that shapes our lives (as stated 
here at point 1).

4 individuals and communities have strengths, knowledge and skills that we come 
in contact with, although these features may not be noticeable to the individuals 
and communities possessing them.

Following on from the last point, the forgotten/hidden strengths that individuals 
have may appear as thin traces in their stories. The role of the coaches (and mentors) 
is therefore to develop these strengths, skills and knowledge. Their task is therefore 
to locate the significant moments in their clients’ life journies and to help them take 
stock of their living experience, which they tended to neglect up until now (this is why 
it left only thin traces). Viewed from the narrative perspective, coaches and mentors 
can be regarded as ‘meaning-makers’.

narrative approaches in coaching and mentoring enable clients to become aware 
that they have more knowledge and skills to cope with the situation than they previ-
ously realized. Through the coach–coachee engagement, the coachees redevelop, 
from the story they have told, an account of what they give value to in their lives. This 
account may embody concepts about their life and identity, hopes and dreams, and so 
on. The new story, developed through narrative practice, provides a foundation from 
which they can proceed. The coaching task is to contribute to the scaffolding of the 
proximal zone of development. According to White (2006, 2007), the structure of 
scaffolding the proximal zone of development can be designed by mapping it onto the 
distancing tasks (which White called ‘landscape of action’ and the ‘landscape of con-
scious’ respectively). in developing this scaffold, one takes a conceptual journey, trav-
elling through the ‘landscape of action’ and the ‘landscape of identity’ (which links to 
one’s consciousness via effective questioning) to help coachees develop the stories of 
their lives and personal identity. As Michael White used to say to me during his 
teaching, ‘it is through scaffolding questions that these alternative landscapes of the 
mind are richly described’.

The landscape of action

Landscapes of action are composed of events described by the storyteller. These events 
are likely to be interwoven or linked in sequence through time, which makes an auto-
biographical/historical journey out of the storyteller’s life. Like in any story, the 
sequence of events told by coachees is likely to develop a theme or a plot that reflects 



136 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

their coping strategy, success or failure. in other words, the landscape of action con-
sists of the following elements:

•  time line: the time of the events in terms of recent, distant or remote history;
•  events: a number of singular events;
•  circumstance: the circumstances under which each event takes place;
•  sequence: the interrelating of events into clusters or sequences;
•  plot/theme: the consequences of events (for instance, strategy, success, loss or failure).

Looking at the landscape of action through the lens of a Johari window (Figure 6.6), 
the stories that coachees choose to disclose during the coaching session represent 
what is known and familiar to them about themselves; but some of the themes could 
remain hidden from the coach (quadrants i and iii).

The landscape of consciousness

Landscapes of consciousness are composed of the storytellers’ identities, conclusions 
about their actions, and events that are shaped by their identity and contemporary 
culture. The landscape of consciousness represents the understanding that the listener 
has gained from the story. These understandings may be intentional or internal:

•  intentional understandings: value, purpose, aspiration, personal agency and 
restoration;

•  internal understandings: realizations (self-awareness) and learning.

in a Johari window, the landscape of consciousness may highlight a storyteller’s blind 
spots, which usually appear as thin traces in the plot, and which the coach needs to 
understand and develop further. i shall describe how this can be tackled through the 
narrative process.

Broadly speaking, the narrative process can be divided into two parts:

1 externalizing conversation;
2 re-authoring.

However, strictly speaking, one could regard re-authoring as a form of externalization.

Externalizing conversation
Part 1 – externalizing conversation – consists of two stages: description and rela-
tion mapping. Part 2 – re-authoring – consists of three stages: evaluation/re-evalu-
ation, justification and conclusion/recommendation. i shall describe all these stages in 
greater detail next.

stagE 1: dEscription
The coach invites the coachee to tell a story about life or work (depending on the 
topic of the session, which could be business or work issues, relationships, work–life 
balance, and so on). note that the story may have many themes or plots (elsbree, 
1982), and these may be dialectic in nature. How the story is told is as important as 



 Techniques and Tools 137

what it contains. The themes could be intertwined, isolated, frozen, incomplete, 
unspoken or evolving (Roberts, 1994). Listening to the coachee’s story, the coach 
tries to identify the key themes and plots indicating any ‘internalized problem’ that 
might have affected the coachee’s sense of self and identity. For instance a ‘frozen’ 
theme may have become a dominant plot in the story and may be rigid and difficult 
to change. The known and familiar themes may be repeatedly told. Such elements 
present the coach with the challenge of re-authoring (to be discussed later). The coach 
encourages the coachee to externalize the problem – for example, by giving it a name.

stagE 2: RElation mapping
in the coachee’s story, the coach attempts to identify the aspirations, values, hopes and 
dreams that give the coachee a sense of purpose more consistent with his or her desir-
able self-identity. However, the evidence for all these elements that appeared in the 
story as told might very often be in thin traces. This is because life experience is richer 
than discourse. Although the narrative provides one with structures and meaning to 
describe one’s experience, there are always ‘feeling and lived experiences’ that ‘are not 
fully encompassed by the dominant story’ (Brunner, 1986: 143). Borrowing from 
the anthropological theories of Brunner (1986) and Geertz (1973), Michael White 
(1997) spoke about a ‘thin description’, in contrast to the foreground dominant 
storyline – the ‘thick description’. The coach needs to identify any unique outcomes 
that might have been neglected by the coachee, because these neglected events may 
help them both to co-construct the alternative storylines. The coachee may give many 
examples of failure to support his or her predominantly negative storyline – his or her 
negative thick description. The coach may ask the coachee to think about any excep-
tions that may constitute a successful outcome – a  counterplot – in his or her own 
experience. This counterplot provides ‘a point of entry’ (rite of passage) to the 
alternative storyline, which may prompt the coachee to see new possibilities. The 
coach helps the coachee to create a map for the zone between the latter’s positive 
self-identity and the negative description of his or her actions, as the sequence of 
events unfolds – in other words, the zone between the thin and the thick descriptions. 
This would enable the coachee to identify the ‘learning gap’ or – to use Vygotsky’s 
term – the ‘zone of proximal development’ that the two need to bridge.

The dynamics of the externalizing conversation can be illustrated in Figure 7.5, 
where Michael White described narrative development as the mapping of the landscape 
of action upon the landscape of consciousness.

Re-authoring
Like everything else in coaching, re-authoring is future-oriented or focused on the 
future. in this process the coachee’s story is regarded as a ‘script’, and the coachee as 
the ‘author’. in this capacity, coachees should have the power and freedom to re-
author the story of their own lives. Here one can regard re-authoring as another form 
of externalization, whereby the coachees are taking an external(ized) position in order 
to look at their own ‘life story’ as an author. Here i shall describe the narrative 
approach as a general process and integrate the re-authoring technique within the 
practice of externalizing conversation.

As described in the previous section, re-authoring, as part of externalizing 
conversation/narrative practice, is a co-construction or co-authorship between the 



138 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

coachee and the coach, the two working in equal partnership, whereby an alternative 
story emerges. This new story is filled with possibilities, unlike the ‘problem-full’ old 
story (Bor and Legg, 2003). Here the role of the coach is to facilitate the conversation. 
This facilitation privileges certain alternative accounts of the coachee’s lived experience, 
which are judged to be more desirable (e.g. more positive: for further references, see also  
Gale, 1992; Gale and newfield, 1992; Kogan, 1998; and Kogan and Gale, 1997).

in re-authoring, the narrative discourse of the coachee’s beliefs and values is regarded 
as a ‘restraint’ when a particular storyline has been chosen ‘instead of’ many possible 
alternatives. This concept of ‘restraint’, with its use of ‘instead of’ rather than ‘because 
of’, is fundamental to re-authoring (see Figure 7.6; see also Bateson, 1972: 399; Bor 
and Legg, 2003: 270). So the re-authoring process consists of the following stages.

stagE 3: evaluation/rE-Evaluation
To bridge the learning gaps that have been identified at Stage 2, the coach continues to 
focus on those thin storylines that could strengthen the coachees’ sense of identity, try-
ing to gather more evidence to support the alternative storyline or thicken the plot. This 
stage provides ‘scaffolding’ to bridge the coachees’ learning gaps by recruiting their 
lived experience. The coach asks coachees to re-evaluate the impact of their actions 
upon their own sense of self-identity, values and beliefs, to stretch their  imagination and 
to exercise their meaning-making resources. The coach also encourages coachees to 
map their aspirations, values and self-identity upon their actions in terms of new future 
possibilities on the life’s horizon. This stage is very often referred to as ‘the turning 

Conclusion
Justification
Evaluation

Relation
mapping

Thin traces
Landscape of 
consciousness 
Identity 
Value

Learning/ 
understanding

Plots

Description Realizations

Events
sequence

Remote 
history

Distant 
history

Recent 
history      
Circumstance

Present
Near 
future

Landscape of 
action
Time

Thick 
description

Figure 7.5 development of storylines illustrating thin and thick descriptions

Conclusion
Justification

Thin traces
Landscape of 
consciousness
Identity
Value 

Evaluation
Relation
mapping

Learning/ 
understanding

Description
Thick 
description Realizations

Events
sequence

Remote 
history

Distant 
history

Recent 
history      
Circumstance

Present
Near 
future

Landscape of 
action
Time

Turning point

Re-
authoring

Thickening
plots

Figure 7.6 Revisiting the development of storylines, which shows many possibilities



 Techniques and Tools 139

point’ where a coachee begins to change: he or she moves from  reiterating the old 
 storyline to start discovering new possibilities and actions.

stagE 4: Justification
The coach makes the plot thicken still further and consolidates coachees’ commit-
ment to change. The aim of the narrative approach is to develop a ‘thick description’ 
of an alternative storyline ‘that is inscribed with […] meanings’ and finds linkages 
between ‘the stories of people’s lives and their cherished values, beliefs, purposes, 
desires, commitments, and so on’ (White, 1997: 15–16). At this stage, coachees are 
asked to justify this evaluation of the alternative storyline in terms of their aspirations, 
beliefs, values, self-identity and strengths.

stagE 5: Conclusion and rEcommEndation
The coach guides coachees towards drawing conclusions by making value statements 
about their self-identity; these statements are based on their beliefs, values, hopes, and 
dreams. The coach may ask the coachees to write down these statements: put them 
simply on a piece of paper or cast them in the form of a letter or some other device. 
Finally, the coach invites coachees to make a commitment to action by putting 
together an action plan for change and for the achievement of their hopes and dreams 
(the ‘bridging tasks’).

Remembering conversations

When the externalizing conversation involves significant people in the story (for example, 
important family members, or friends who have made a significant impact upon the 
coachee’s life), the coach may use these figures as a vehicle to leverage the re-authoring 
process. This specific form of narrative technique is called ‘remembering’. Conversations 
of ‘remembering’ (or ‘remembering conversations’) are not about a fragmentary and 
passive recollection of people that one has met. The figures to be remembered and retold 
in a story are significant others from one’s history or  from one’s present life. Using 
‘remembering’ as a metaphor from the work of Myerhoff (1980, 1986), White (2006) 
describes remembering conversations as conversations that:

•  evoke ‘life’ as a ‘membered’ club, ‘identity’ as an ‘association’ of life;
•  contribute to a multi-voiced sense of identity, rather than the single-voiced sense 

of identity, which is a feature of the encapsulated self that is the vogue of contem-
porary Western culture;

•  open possibilities for the revision of one’s membership of life: for the upgrading 
of some memberships and the downgrading of others; for the honouring of some 
memberships and for the revoking of others; for the granting of authority to some 
voices in regard to matters of one’s personal identity, and for the disqualification 
of other voices in regard to this matter;

•  describe rich accounts of preferred identity and knowledge of life and skills of 
living that have been co-generated in the significant memberships of people’s lives.

in reviewing memberships, the coach can further explore the accounts of the 
 storyteller’s own identities, knowledge and skills. From the rich description, many 



140 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

significant outcomes, conclusions, learning and problem-solving practices may be 
 discovered. They can make a significant contribution to the storyteller’s sense of iden-
tity, knowledge and skills. This awareness provides a foundation for the coachee’s 
personal development. As a result, it enables coaches and coachees to draw up specific 
proposals about how they might go forward.

outsider witness retelling

externalized conversations can also be applied in group or team situations, where one 
or more members are asked to act as a witness to the story. Participants are offered the 
option of telling the story of their life before an audience. The selected outsider wit-
nesses can also act as assistants to the narrative coach, as they can provide extra support 
for the coachees, beyond the tradition of acknowledgement. After they have listened 
to the story, the outsider witnesses are asked to retell it. in particular, they are guided 
by the coach’s questions to those aspects of the story that resonate with their own 
experience. The retellings by outsider witnesses do not necessarily constitute a 
complete account of the original story, but they focus on aspects that have most sig-
nificantly engaged their imagination.

The outsider witnesses respond to the stories by retelling certain aspects of what 
they heard. depending on the culture of the place where the outsider witness retellings 
take place, these activities may be shaped by certain traditions of acknowledgement. 
According to White (1995a, 1997, 2000, 2006), there are four categories of reflective 
responses from outsider witnesses. narrative practitioners can ask or guide the outsider 
witnesses to:

•  identify the expression of the storyteller;
•  describe the image that the story has evoked;
•  demonstrate the embodiment of their responses to the coachee’s story by articu-

lating their understanding of the meaning that story and how it resonates with 
their own life experiences;

•  acknowledge any ‘transport’ of knowledge from the story to their own life by 
thanking the coachee for sharing his or her story.

one may argue that, even in a one-to-one coaching conversation, the coach acts 
as a first outsider witness by listening to the coachee’s story – which is a form of 
acknowledgement.

definitional ceremony (community): retellings of retellings

The practice of outsider witness retellings can be expanded to a larger group, organi-
zation or community. A large group can be subdivided into smaller ones. The process 
of retelling the coachee’s story in a definitional ceremony is reiterative and sequential. 
it is multi-layered and has the following structures or steps:

1 storytelling, undertaken by the coachee (storyteller), who is at the centre of the 
ceremony;

2 retellings of the story (first retelling), undertaken by outsider witnesses;



 Techniques and Tools 141

3 retellings of retellings (second retelling), undertaken by the coachee (initial 
storyteller);

4 retellings of retellings of retellings (third retelling), undertaken by outsider 
 witnesses of the initial group to the secondary one, and so on.

Within the context of narrative practice (and within the broader context of poststruc-
turalism), a person’s self-identity is not governed by private and individual achievement 
but by the following forces – which are social, historical and cultural:

•  one’s own history;
•  one’s own sense of authenticity;
•  public and social achievements;
•  acknowledgement of one’s preferred claims about one’s own identity.

Theoretically speaking, the process of retelling could continue indefinitely. in  practice, 
the layers of retelling depend on physical and temporal constraints.

The definitional ceremony is the ‘moving’ of all the participants, and therefore it is 
ideal for group or community work in conference-style or community gatherings. it 
provides an opportunity for storytellers to become who they want to be rather than 
who they were in the past. Metaphorically speaking, both the storyteller and the par-
ticipants are ‘being moved’ (they are in an emotional state) and ‘transported’ from one 
place to another in their life as a direct consequence of participating in the ceremony.

From this we can see that the definitional ceremony is a powerful way to confer 
social acknowledgement upon the storyteller’s self-identity, which may have been 
 previously denied as a result of his or her social condition, especially at the intersection 
of cross-cultural factors. in narrative terms, a definitional ceremony thickens many 
alternative themes or counterplots and amplifies the empowerment the storytellers 
received, which would not be available to them otherwise.

The narrative coach’s attitude and posture

in response to specific developments in coachees’ stories, it can be very tempting for 
coaches to construe a unique positive outcome prematurely. Coaches should guard 
themselves against committing the error of ‘false positive’ identification (type 1 error) 
by observing the following rules. do:

•  Let coachees discover the unique positive outcome by themselves.

don’ts:

•  Convince coachees that they could take more notice of certain developments.
•  Point out the consequences or potential implications of, or possibilities associated 

with, the developments of certain storylines.
•  Take a strongly positive position on these consequences, implications, and 

 possibilities – you yourself, as a coach.
•  Justify your position on the recommendations you make by voicing a range of 

positive conclusions about the coachees’ lives and identities.



142 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

White advocates maintaining a ‘de-centred posture’ for narrative practitioners; this 
can contribute to the scaffolding of externalizing conversations. We can transport this 
posture to the training of the coach’s attitude, which may give coaches the opportu-
nity to attribute significance to various personal developments that might otherwise 
be neglected in their stories (see Table 7.2).

Coaches in narrative practice should adopt a ‘de-centred and influential’ posture 
when they are in conversation with coachees (the top-left quadrant in Table 7.2). The 
notion of ‘de-centred’ does not refer to the intensity of the coach–coachee engage-
ment, but to the coachees’ achievement of according priority to their personal stories 
and to their knowledge and skills. By taking a de-centred but influential stand, coaches 
allow coachees to have a ‘primary authorship’ status with regard to the stories of their 
lives. The knowledge and skills that have been generated in the course of retelling the 
history of the coachees’ lives are the principal considerations in  narrative coaching.

Coaches are influential, but not in the sense that they impose their own agenda. 
Their role in this process is to build a scaffold by means of questions and reflections. 
This makes it possible for coachees to construe their own problematic stories as well 
as to discover solutions. The aim of narrative coaching is to help coachees to:

•  describe the alternative stories of their lives (hopefully more richly);
•  explore some of the neglected areas of their lives by following up and developing 

some of the thin traces in their storylines;
•  become more significantly acquainted with their own knowledge and skills, 

as reflected throughout their lives, as well as with their aspirations, hopes and 
dreams. All these will be relevant to addressing their past or present concerns, 
predicaments and problems.

Putting It All Together: Developing Your Own 
Authentic Coaching Process

in this chapter you have been introduced a range of approaches. each has its own 
school of thought and different attitudes and styles that it expects from coaches 
and mentors. if you are a coach or a mentor with a specific orientation, you may 
be familiar with some of the techniques described here, such as CBT or gestalt 
psychology; others may find the techniques to be entirely new and overwhelming 

Table 7.2 narrative coaching attitude (adopted from Michael White’s 2006  
therapeutic posture)

Attitude/effect De-centred Centred

Influential de-centred and influential 
(potentially invigorating coach/
coachee)

Centred and influential 
(potentially burdening coach)

Non-influential de-centred and non-influential
(potentially invalidating coach)

Centred and non-influential 
(potentially exhausting coach)



 Techniques and Tools 143

in their diversity. This section aims to bring readers from the unknown to the 
known and on familiar territory, while at the same time gathering together all the 
different strands.

The GRoW model revisited

The GRoW model is one of the best-known and most practised models in the coach-
ing industry. Although the GRoW model was made popular by Sir John Whitmore 
through the publication of his book Coaching for Performance (which is regarded by 
many coaches as a core text), the psychological theories and principles that underpin 
it are relatively elementary. For example, Maslow’s model of a hierarchy of needs is 
well known among undergraduate psychology students, though its application to 
coaching may be new to many business coaches (Whitmore, 2002). nevertheless, the 
GRoW model provides a useful description of the different stages of the process. 
it  helps you and your coachees to clarify the expected outcomes (e.g. improved 
performance in relation to the coachees’ GoAL, or specific behaviour change 
according to an action plan in the WiLL stage). GRoW is a useful tool for struc-
turing a coaching session. it offers a framework for discussing and exploring goals, 
reality (the current situation), options, and the way forward or willingness. The 
natural starting point is the goal; however, the goal is not always clear until later in 
the session, so it may need revisiting. Although the structure seems linear, the process 
is a reiterative or circular one, such that the goal set can be reviewed in future sessions. 
After discussing the way forward it may be necessary to revisit the options or realign 
the goal.

i hope that, by reading this book, you are learning and developing further the 
rich and diverse psychological principles that are relevant to your practice. So a key 
question is: ‘How do different techniques fit into the GRoW model in your own 
practice?’

For example, one could map the major coaching approaches onto a time line with 
the present – the here and now – as the pivot (Figure 7.7). The learning wheel of 
transformation turns on the pivot in the centre of the timeline. Here i have loosely 
indicated different approaches that may associate with each stage of the GRoW 
model, as follows:

1 Topic: initial understanding (psychodynamic → gestalt)
2 Goal: What do you want? (CBT)
3 Reality: What happens now? (gestalt)
4 options: What could you do? (gestalt → CBT)
5 Will: What will you do? (CBT)

An exercise for the reader: Where would you locate the narrative approach on the map?
i shall expand on how the mapping may be implemented at each stage.

Goal setting
The primary objective of this model is goal setting. Coachees should set a long-term 
goal, a short-term goal, a goal for the session, a goal for their issues, and so on. For 
instance, coaches may ask: ‘What would you like to get out of this coaching session?’ 



144 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

The goal should be optimal and challenging. Coaches also need to facilitate the pro-
cess by which coachees take ownership of the goal by asking: ‘Whose goal is this?’ one 
may like to break down the goal into a set of manageable SMARTeR objectives. 
initially, as part of the CBT scheme, the coach may like to check a coachee’s emotion 
and cognition in relation to those objectives.

in practice, some coachees may find that it is not that easy to identify the goals 
without setting the context (topic) or reviewing the current situation (Megginson 
and Clutterbuck, 1995). Hence the GRoW model may sometimes be referred to as 
TGRoW. one needs to be guided by the aspirations, knowledge and skills that are 
brought to the interaction by the coachees. Here the externalizing conversation may 
be useful in that it enables coach and coachee alike to understand the narrative that 
underpins those hopes and aspirations.

Reality
The goal needs to be realistic and objective so that coachees do not suffer from early 
failure as a result of unrealistic expectations. Coaches need to get feedback from 
coachees about their performance: ‘What worked? What didn’t?’

For example, during a session, a coach may set out a CBT framework for a coachee 
and find she or he is stuck in a past worry and cannot move forward. in this case, the 
coach may apply a gestalt mindfulness exercise within the CBT session, to bring the 
coachee back to the here and now and to focus on the solution in the present.

Options
The coaching task involves guiding the coachees towards writing an action plan and 
making a list of specific tasks designed to help them to achieve their goal. Generating a 
list of options enables coachees to maximize their choices. To avoid negative assump-
tions and an undesired limitation of possible options, the exercise should be non-criti-
cal and non-judgemental. Questions include: ‘What options would help you move 
towards your goal?’ A useful question at the end of the session is: ‘Can you come up 
with one more option?’ After a list of options has been compiled, coaches and coachees 
work together to sort them according to priority and feasability. in CBT terms, coaches 
may sometime need to help the coachees to identify the problems associated with the 
options, which very often are emotionally charged. The coachees need to work through 
their thinking patterns (PiTs and PeTs) and develop possible strategies to overcome 
these problems. Coaches may ask: ‘What barriers might you encounter? What will you 
do about them? Who will be able to help you overcome those barriers?’

Will
As a typical coaching practice, the GRoW model is future-oriented. At the end of the 
session, coaches may ask coachees: ‘What will you do now?’ A list of questions may 

Here and Now

Gestalt Psychodynamic CBT 

0. Topic G

R O W

Figure 7.7 Mapping different coaching techniques along the time line



 Techniques and Tools 145

include: ‘What is the action plan?’ ‘How will this action meet your goal?’ ‘When by?’ 
in conclusion, the narrative coach may ask how the action plan resonates with the 
coachee’s sense of identity, values, beliefs, hopes and aspirations and may invite the 
coachee to indicate the commitment required to take the plan forward.

i hope that learners, coaches or mentors who are reading this book will find the map 
a useful pointer towards the application of different techniques in different contexts. 
in practice, one needs to be flexible about ordering the stages of the process – ready 
to move to and fro between them, as needs be.

Coaching off-piste

in the first edition, Sarah ireland emphasized that, as coaches and mentors, we need 
to enhance our focused exploration of the multiple contexts of experience and opti-
mize the scope for creativity and learning at the intersection between boundaries. She 
suggested including ‘coaching off-piste’ as an example of coaching and mentoring 
beyond boundaries that readers may find useful. This idea is fully dealt with here, as 
part of putting together a concept of coaching off-piste. Where appropriate, i have 
added further questions, comments, information and references. i hope you too will 
find it useful in developing your own coaching process.

Coaching off-piste can be described as meaning:

•  creating momentum and change, a passion for learning that goes beyond goals 
and targets;

•  establishing an evolving purpose and sense of the longer journey, where conscious 
and unconscious strands of life can be considered in new ways;

•  involving new explorations, new means and new collaborations.

in the universal integrative framework / integrative learning system (UiF /iLS), the 
simple ability to use our existing set of skills with a different emphasis goes a long way. 
We have addressed these areas for emphasis at the exploration stage as questions. You 
can encourage people to use pictures, tell stories or use challenges in order to extend 
their thinking.

The UiF (iLS) can help you to develop in the following areas:

•  cultural agility/individual differences among universal concepts;
•  bridging the collective and individual purpose;
•  learning to live with temporary states and with delay in gratification (emotional 

intelligence);
•  beyond goals;
•  beyond language to meaning;
•  life stages/universality in the system and framework;
•  prophecy and spirituality for creativity (transpersonal).

We provide below some questions as tools for each area.

Developing cultural agility
on the concept of time, different contexts gauge time and timeliness differently. 
Questions include:



146 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

•  How does time work for you?
•  What does it mean?
•  What does it mean in this context?
•  How much value do you put on time?
•  How much value do others put on time?
•  How does business work generally?
•  What specific elements are important to you? What are the differences in this 

setting?
•  How do you know?

The above questions resonate with Rosinski’s (2003) cultural orientations framework 
and time management approaches. depending on the individual culture, time may be 
perceived as a ‘scarce’ resource or as a ‘plentiful’ one. individuals manage it differ-
ently. one may concentrate on one activity and/or relationship at a time, or be mono-
chronic; another may concentrate simultaneously on several tasks and relationships, or 
be polychronic.

From the perspective of iLS, questions can be used in a funnelled and probing 
approach, moving across personal, social and cultural domains. For example, from 
your personal perspective:

•  What skills and knowledge do you have in your situation?
•  What role do you take in this situation?
•  Why do you take on that role?
•  What beliefs do you have that inform what you do in this situation?
•  What beliefs do you have about yourself in this situation?
•  What issues do you have with time?
•  How does time affect the way you work and live?
•  What impact do the seasons have on you?

You may want to separate some of these questions from an environmentalist 
perspective:

•  What are the significant features of the environment that impact on the scope of 
your knowledge and skills and on your use of them?

•  How do beliefs and rules impact on you?
•  What are the bigger picture issues – history, threats, opportunities, impetus for 

change?
•  What are the majority beliefs about the environment that impact on your beliefs 

and the way you work?
•  What are the minority beliefs about the environment that impact on your beliefs 

and on the way you work?
•  How aligned are you with the context in which you operate? or how happy are 

you here?

To be culturally agile, we need to be able to recognize an opportunity for movement 
and learning and to make the shift to get there. The questions below can increase that 
momentum by stimulating adaptability and agility from one’s own perspective:



 Techniques and Tools 147

•  How effective are you in monitoring what is going on in your environment?
•  What do you use to keep abreast of fine changes in your environment?
•  What indicators do you use to track changes and movements?
•  How ‘in tune’ do you feel you are with adjustments in your environment?
•  How adaptable have you been in the past to changing situations?
•  What has gone less well?
•  What example can you give of adapting to change in a timely way?
•  When have you successfully instigated a change?
•  How do you decide when to respond quickly?

The questions below can stimulate adaptability and agility from an environmentalist 
perspective:

•  What are the features and characteristics in the environment that make it slow to 
react to change? (Beliefs, policies, systems, rituals, ways of working etc.)

•  What are the features and behaviours of the players that make the environment 
less receptive to change?

•  What are the features and behaviours of marginalized or minority groups that are 
slow to react to change? And what are those that are receptive to change?

•  What are the features and characteristics of the collective players that make the 
environment quick to change?

•  What are the features and characteristics that make minority or marginalized 
groups receptive to change?

•  What prevents the environment from responding in a timely way?
•  What enables the environment to respond quickly?

Bridging the collective and the individual purpose
Parents and other family members can use their vision or faculty of imagination to 
consider the kind of family life they want, and from there they can work out the frame-
works, roles, responsibilities and behaviours that support their vision. For example:

•  How do you visualize your family?
•  What distinguishes your family from others?
•  What values does it have?
•  Whom do you relate to in the wider community?
•  What traditions and behaviours are important in your family?
•  How realistic is the model they create?
•  Where are the challenges to achieving such an ideal?
•  What knowledge, skills and resources will you need to enable that to happen?

For people who take the longer view of life, visioning can embody eternal life as well 
as earthly life.

Learning to live with temporary states
one of the challenges to mental agility arises within our own mind. Many of us 
struggle with temporary states – in ourselves and in our contexts of operation. 



148 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

Typically, such states are boredom, frustration, fear, loss of self- control. We may have 
to struggle or cope with temporary destabilization, uncertainty and chaos in the 
external world. We may feel that we want to give up when there is a long delay before 
we can reap the benefits of our actions. What is certain about temporary states is that 
you know you are on the cusp of something new. For example:

•  Can you think of a time when you had to work for a long period before seeing the 
benefits?

•  What were the particular challenges?
•  How did you get through?
•  What kept you going?
•  How did the benefits manifest themselves?
•  How does this help you to prepare for discomfort now?
•  Why are you so dissatisfied with how you are thinking?
•  Why do you feel so uncomfortable?
•  How could you make a small but significant impact or shift the situation?
•  Where do you see yourself in the bigger picture?

Beyond goals
Apart from the goal and the objectives designed to establish a longer term direction, 
we can also consider alternatives. The notion of hypothesis setting and opportunity 
spotting may be more congruent with us as learners, and inherently with our total 
context. Unlike the goal, which limits the outcome to success or failure, the hypo-
thesis encourages us to be explorers of learning. Here are some examples of question-
ing that takes individuals beyond goals and focuses on the exploration itself:

•  What are you enjoying learning at the moment?
•  How can you transfer that learning to other areas?
•  What kind of thinking interests you?
•  What unexpected connections have you made between different elements in your 

experience?
•  What ideas excite you?

Beyond language to meaning
When we are working with people in business, we often ask them to use metaphors and 
language from their work world to describe themselves, and then we help them to 
translate it all into language that relates to their personal selves. They often find they are 
more able to express themselves in the language of work and have become more separ-
ated from their ‘personal selves’. To do this, you can use the following questions:

•  What are the demands upon you?
•  Where have you positioned yourself on this?
•  Who are the stakeholders in this?

We can also find metaphors from family and community life – for instance, we create 
the analogy with a football team and ask people to say who they are in that team.



 Techniques and Tools 149

Life stages
We can help people get in touch with their universality by focusing on the common 
elements. For example:

•  Where do you feel you are in your life – at what stage?
•  How would you describe it?
•  How does this life stage impact on how you see the world?
•  What are you expecting to learn in this life stage?

We can use life roles (spouse or lover, child, parent, adult) to explore wider issues 
from different perspectives. How would you perceive this team issue as a parent?

Prophecy and spirituality for creativity
By its very nature, prophecy has roots into a whole range of faiths and cross-cultural 
traditions. Using prophecy and understanding the element of spirituality in people’s 
stories – finding signs of spirituality and fulfilment of vision – is a way to motivate 
ourselves as well as to ensure that we are on track. it enables individuals to cross time 
zones and consider the bigger picture, and it draws both new perspectives and old 
learning into the exploration of current issues. Useful questions might include:

•  How does this experience add to your sense of how the world works?
•  What patterns and themes can you see in your experience that now have meaning?
•  Where does this fit in with your action plan?
•  Where is this taking you?
•  How much do you feel driven to do this? (to check commitment)

With each of these questions, we hope you extend your exploratory emphasis on the 
integration of cultural factors into personal, social and epistemic areas relevant to your 
coachee or mentee. Coaches and mentors might also want to challenge themselves to 
remember their own latest creative thought or intervention.

•  How did that thought change the situation?
•  How did that thought change the relationship with the coachee or mentee?
•  What did you learn about yourself?
•  What did you learn about the bigger picture?
•  How did it change the world?

This is an eclectic set of questions; in a way they resonate with Megginson and Clutterbuck’s 
(1995) approach, which is known as the British eclectic model and in which they listed 
107 coaching and mentoring questions as a reference. This section has proposed a new 
set of questions, which resonate with the UiF/iLS value; and instead of simply making a 
long list of them, we have organized them according to the structure the UiF/iLS. We 
hope that you can easily utilize them in your coaching or mentoring conversation.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

This chapter has shown how the integrative learning system is used in practice by 
showing a range of possible techniques that may be applied at each system level. 



150 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning 

Gestalt focuses on the present but acknowledges the past. The coach draws attention 
to the client’s posture, voice, gestures and so on, to build awareness and to work 
through emotional blocks. This approach addresses contact boundaries and uses three 
main techniques to facilitate learning, namely supression, expression and integration. 
Gestaltism recognizes our connectedness with our environmental field, where the 
whole is greater than the sum of its parts. The aim of gestaltism is to accept our 
complete ‘true selves’. For example, gestalt approaches systematically support gen-
uine self-expression by means of a negative reinforcement of insincerity. in positive 
psychology terms, these are the signature strengths of the gestalt coach and mentor.

While CBT is regarded as a powerful tool in executive coaching, it needs to be 
refined to adapt to the context of the organization and culture of individual coachees. 
To make it effective, coaches and mentors need to pay attention to other factors, such 
as interpersonal relationships (Safran, 1990). Common ground exists among different 
coaching approaches; they are a collaborative intervention between coaches and 
coachees. in this journey, participants attempt to explore meaningful interpretations 
and modify them in order to reach their destiny, the end game, the goal – which may 
be for example to improve performance, or to achieve a better work–life balance.

From a cultural perspective, tolerance of difference does not equate with cultural 
agility, and learning is likely to be minimal when only homogenous relationships in 
familiar contexts prevail. At the edge of the boundary of our own experience lies the 
opportunity for learning, and if several of these boundaries are crossed concurrently – 
which is a situation of maximum complexity – then we demonstrate cultural agility. 
As coaches, we can help coachees to tell their stories in new ways, explore new thinking 
and acquire a new sense of self. There are many techniques to the narrative approach 
that can help one to cross personal and cultural boundaries. To summarize, the 
combined narrative approach that has been discussed in this chapter consists of the 
following techniques or stages:

1 externalizing conversations (1:1);
2 remembering/re-authoring (1:1);
3 outsider witness retelling (1:1:n);
4 definitional ceremony (community) – retellings of retellings.

in conclusion, the iLS advocates:

•  flexibility of design and transparency of process;
•  contextualizing the person in her or his story;
•  aspects of positive psychology in identifying history, strengths and track records 

or  strategies of successful transitional boundary crossing and management of 
complexity;

•  the importance of a systemic consideration of the cultural and contextual land-
scapes from a variety of perspectives;

•  in-depth planning for the application of strategy to specific contexts;
•  flexibility of learning;
•  the importance of reviews and paying attention to the system boundaries of 

coaching);
•  basic training and supervision for coachees and for coaches.



 Techniques and Tools 151

Within the iLS coaches and mentors are encouraged to share frameworks, techniques 
and insights with coachees and mentees, so that the process is transparent and posi-
tions in the relationship are not fixed. While coaches tend to use probing questions, 
you might, as a gestalt practitioner, focus on expanding the coachee’s own awareness 
instead. For practitioners of the three-step or five-step coaching process and GRoW, 
there are ideas to extend your exploration. Chapter 8 includes exercises that give you 
the opportunity to practise such ideas.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Continuing Professional 
development, Learning Resources 

and Practical exercises

Introduction

Following on from Chapter 7, this chapter provides you with some of the particular 
aspects of the integrative learning system (iLS) that need to feature in coaching or 
mentoring training and with some of the resources and exercises to support those 
main areas. The chapter does not attempt to cover a training course, not least because 
every programme needs to be different. As a starting point, it describes a supervision 
approach that fits in with the iLS; this is followed by a consideration of the ‘receptive-
ness’ approach to coaching and mentoring as a precursor to selection for training. We 
then go on to consider exercises from cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and gestalt 
that can strengthen your practice whether you are using a simple, three-step approach 
to coaching and mentoring or the GRoW model. The chapter then discusses story-
telling exercises, which can also inform generic coach or mentor practice and one 
aspect of the narrative psychodrama – for those who want to experiment. We go into 
specific techniques and questioning areas, which readers can readily adapt to their 
exercises. Similarly, the other techniques discussed in Chapter 7 are easily adapted for 
triad work in which one participant in training observes the dialogue between the 
others and gives feedback.

ILS Training and Continuous Professional Development

iLS can be mapped onto your own training provision for coaching and mentoring. 
on the whole it advocates that all participants in the process receive basic training 
in coaching and mentoring (ideally for at least one to two days), so that coachees 
and mentees have enough information on the process to know how to steer it. This 
 process should also be transparent, so that all players may be able to access information 

8



154 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

and techniques that allow them to coach both themselves and others. The training 
should be a partnership where the roles of helper and helped are fluid. Sometimes 
the same person is being mentored and coached by the same person, other times by 
different people. All participants can attend basic training together and learn 
together.

in general, coaching and mentoring offer the clients some degree of social support. 
Thus both coaching and mentoring require empathy and share some of the features 
of counselling. So, training programmes might have some core elements in common; 
but they differ in their contextualization. For instance, there is usually a need for 
those who feel they can offer more as mentors to do more training in a specific 
domain; but that specification will vary depending on the type and level of mentoring 
required. often training is differentiated by the proficiency level into introductory, 
intermediate and advanced. executive coaching might require higher level skills and 
greater knowledge of how organizations work and of the nature of management in a 
complex environment. Advisory coaching might be a short-term intervention with 
coaching elements infused into information giving – as for example in coaching for 
career change or re-employment.

Supervision is an important part of continuous professional development (CPd), 
and it is designed to ensure accountability, collective practice, shared learning and 
personal development. it eases the flow of information between individual and the 
collective entity so as to shape policies, steer priorities and assure levels of practice. in 
addition to supervision, one should have appropriate individually based CPd, in line 
with the individual caseload, complexity, professional and organization requirements. 
Having inclusion, options and flexibility is the name of the game.

in the iLS the process is transparent, and in consequence all participants to it can 
potentially develop to perform any one of the required roles: coach, mentor, coachee, 
mentee, supervisor, coordinator, trainer. in iLS coaching, the emphasis moves away 
from the hierarchical structure of supervision to CPd; coaches and mentors may train 
to become supervisors as part of their CPd. Working with colleagues in this role, in a 
range of settings, improves their competency and extends their learning. in organiza-
tions that employ external and internal coaches, CPd provides an opportunity for 
everyone to get together, review and learn.

The iLS proposes that CPd should be open to all stakeholders, in group or 
individual settings, to help them consolidate their learning. These sessions can look 
at experiences of learning in coaching and mentoring and help those with problems 
in their transition from one context or stage in the process to another. Where there 
is mystery, participants can share learning and insights. They may be offered a range 
of opportunities via e-chat rooms – a virtual forum designed to facilitate their learning 
and develop a community of practice. This learning process can be backed by email 
or Skype supervision, or both – a model of teaching that i use in the distance-learn-
ing programmes in coaching and coaching psychology. in addition to e-coaching 
and mentoring, workshops can be provided to demonstrate further coaching tech-
niques and practice – for instance, classroom-based teaching on the campus. 
depending on one’s aptitude and experience, each of these modes of training has 
much to offer.

CPd also serves as a forum for sharing personal learning – understood as learning 
about the coaching process. individuals can arrange completion of the cultural 



 Continuing Professional Development 155

social competence, self-assessment questionnaire (CSC SAQ) tool (described in 
Chapter 6) to derive their own learning needs within a whole iLS approach to eval-
uation. Participants in training, or the wider CPd community, can use these lists as 
areas of discussion to start reviewing their learning. They can identify the areas of 
development that they need to work on and reflect on the ebbs and flows of 
learning over sessions, on outcomes for distinctive phases in the process and on 
whether the learning areas are synchronous between the coach and the coachee. in 
summary, the iLS enables the learning partners separately, together, or in the wider 
community of learners to explore their journey into development. Much learning 
comes after sessions, between sessions, and at points of change in the stages of 
exploration.

Writing and Keeping a Reflective Log

Writing and keeping a log to reflect on one’s practice is another important  component 
of learning. i often require my coaches, students, or supervisees to keep a reflective 
log as a component of their assignments. Many coaches (especially those who have 
not been academically trained) often find this exercise difficult. Here i offer the 
 following structure to help.

To embed the learning cycle and CBT framework, a reflective log should include 
the following components:

1 description: briefly describe the session, including the context, background of the 
coaches, contracting, etc., stating what happened and/or you did.

2 Cognition and emotion: reflect on your thoughts and feelings. What were you 
thinking/feeling during the engagement? What do you think about the coachee’s 
thoughts and feelings?

3 Analysis: try to understand what happened and draw meaning from the 
experience.

4 evaluation: assess the intended and unintended consequences of the experi-
ence. What have you learnt? if a similar situation arose again, what would you 
do? What are you going to do to further improve and develop yourself and your 
performance?

5 Conclusion: summarize the meaning and the lessons learned; look for 
improvement.

6 Action plan: recommend a future plan of action for further learning and 
improvement.

When you evaluate your learning and develop an action plan (Steps 4–6), you may like 
to use the components of iLS to structure your learning and identify the areas for 
further developments as follows:

personal: self-awareness:

•  self-belief;
•  confidence;



156 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  motivation and passion;
•  self-management;

social: awareness of others:

•  empathy with others;
•  assessment of difference and universality;

cultural: increase in the knowledge of how systems work:

•  application of new knowledge and thinking to familiar situations;
•  application of new knowledge and thinking to new situations;

professional: skills and techniques for the coach or mentor:

•  skills and techniques that i can use as a leader;
•  skills, knowledge and techniques that i can use in new situations;
•  knowledge and skills that i can use as a universal learner.

Exercises in Learning

The following exercises will help you to focus on the nature of learning as a foundation 
for coaching and mentoring. The exercises can be carried out individually or in 
groups, in a training session. if conducted in a group, the coach may like to instruct 
each group to nominate a facilitator or spokesperson to summarize the common key 
points and feedback to the larger group.

identifying sources of negative learning

Exercise 1

List any negative experiences you have had in the past that may stand in the way of 
your change.

if you have difficulty recalling any such experiences, think about a significant person 
associated with the time when you had difficulties learning something new. This 
person and the experience may be recent or from the distant past. For example, the 
person might be your schoolteacher or a difficult colleague.

identifying psychological factors

Exercise 2

List the attributes of the poor coach or mentor. if you do not have any coaching or 
mentoring experience, think about a trainer or a teacher.

Exercise 3

List the attributes of the good coach or mentor.



 Continuing Professional Development 157

identifying intervention

Exercise 4

describe how you overcame the barriers/difficult situation that you described in 
exercise 1.

You may find it helpful to consider the following questions:

•  After you have experienced this, what would your next goal be?
•  What are the expected outcomes?
•  did your intervention consist of some kind of strategy?
•  What form does the strategy take?
•  if you were a coach, what coaching techniques would you use?
•  What are the resources required?

Practising Cognitive Behavioural Coaching

i always ask my clients to keep a diary in a CBT format, so that we may analyse them 
together in the session, together with reviewing progress. Some clients did have diffi-
culty in writing down their thoughts and feelings. it took practice. over time, they 
could think, feel and analyse events that happened in their lives in a way they had not 
experienced before.

A similarly useful tool i have found in applying cognitive behavioural coaching is to 
ask the coachees to keep a personal diary, journal or logbook to record the details of 
activities that are related to their goals according to the structure described in 
Table 7.1 and the six-step reflective log described earlier. Writing a log is an important 
part of reflection, and hence of learning.

Cognitive behavioural diary: writing it down

in writing a reflective diary, coachees arrive at an understanding of events that would 
not have been possible before. Some may even find profound meaning when they 
 discuss this diary with their coaches and mentors. The cognitive behavioural diary 
(CBd) has three components:

•  the past;
•  the present;
•  the present working towards the future.

All this fits naturally into the six-step reflective log. in CBd this process of fitting the 
six steps into the three parts can be summarized thus:

•  Part 1: describe your lived experience – description (Steps 1 and 2 in the log);
•  Part 2: interpret the meaning – Analysis and evaluation (Steps 3 and 4);
•  Part 3: Plan your strategy and action – Conclusion and action plan (Steps 5 and 6).

Here i shall describe these parts in detail.



158 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Part 1: describe your lived experience
in your diary, write down:

•  when: date and time of a significant event;
•  where: location where a significant event happened;
•  what: what happened (the significant event);
•  who: who was involved (the significant ‘actors’, who of course include you);
•  how: how did you feel? (your emotion).

For example, a negative emotion may be referred to through one of these words: 
angry, annoyed, anxious, apprehensive, ashamed, bad, concerned, depressed, disap-
pointed, disgusted, dissatisfied, embarrassed, enraged, exhausted, excluded, fright-
ened, guilty, horrified, humiliated, hurt, insecure, irritated, afraid, frustrated, jealous, 
lonely, mad, nervous, overwhelmed, panicky, poor, sad, scared, sick, tired, worried.

Positive emotion may encompass words like: aspired, better, cheerful, confident, 
delighted, eager, empowered, energetic, enthusiastic, excited, fulfilled, good, happy, 
included, inspired, loved, loving, joyful, peaceful, pleased, proud, relaxed, satisfied, 
secured, well, zestful.

Part 2: interpret the meaning
Write down your reflection:

•  Why did the ‘actors’ behave in a particular way?
•  Why did you feel that way?
•  What have you learnt from the experience?
•  How did the experience help you to achieve your future goal?

Part 3: plan of action (your strategy)
When writing your action plan, ask the following questions:

•  What are you going to do about it?
•  What is the purpose?
•  What do you want to achieve?
•  When by?
•  Who can help you to achieve this?
•  Who needs to be involved?
•  What would be the likely obstacles?
•  How would you overcome them?
•  How do you feel about the task (your emotion)?
•  describe your experience now (the turning point).
•  How do you feel now?
•  Sign off.

Gestalt Exercises

Gestalt techniques can be practised as a series of exercises to increase awareness and as a 
continuum of awareness. Gestalt exercises aim to help practitioners to be fully aware in 



 Continuing Professional Development 159

the present – in the here and now. This ‘living in the moment’ practice is also known as 
the mindfulness practice, which is increasingly well known in the West. The task of the 
coach in the mindfulness exercise is to bring coachees back to the present if they are dis-
tracted from it. Coachees are coached in persistent attention to their ongoing experi-
ence. They are reminded when they are failing at the task of expressing their awareness.

Remember, in the previous chapter we talked about using the self as an instrument. 
in the following exercises you will find that your presence, the way in which you use 
your ‘self ’, is an essential part in the process of change. These exercises aim to help 
you to increase your awareness of the continuum and of asceticism. in other words, 
the exercises directly access the realm of your personhood and presence, beyond any 
biological input and output. The demand for directness increases clarity and reduces 
the message-to-noise ratio.

There are three levels in gestalt exercises. These levels progressively increase partici-
pants’ self- and social awareness and engagements. Classified by level, the exercises are:

•  i/you exercises;
•  awareness of continuum exercises;
•  top dog/underdog exercises.

Level 1: i/You exercises

These exercises help you to develop awareness that is implicit in Gestalt psychology.

Exercise 5: Presence

This exercise focuses on the sense of presence. it can be performed alone, in pairs or 
in a group. if you work with pairs, ask each member of a pair to sit face to face and to 
close his or her eyes. Then each participant should follow these instructions:

1 Be as you want to be.
2 Pay attention to your body sensations, posture and facial expression.
3 Make any necessary adjustment in your posture on the basis of your awareness, 

moment by moment.
4 When you feel comfortable and ready, open your eyes while remaining still.
5 Relax your eyes.
6 Relax your body.
7 Focus on the sense of being in the present – the ‘i sense’.
8 i sense that ‘i am here’.
9 Relax.

10 Focus on this ‘i sense’ for a moment.
11 Be aware of your breathing.
12 Silently, speak to yourself: ‘i am here’.
13 Synchronize this inner speech, ‘i am here’, with your breathing. For example:

a. Breathe in and focus on ‘i’.
b. Pause and think of ‘am’.
c. Breathe out and focus on ‘here’.

14  Continue the breathing exercise until you fully achieve a sense of presence or it 
feels appropriate to end.



160 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Exercise 6: You-ness

This exercise helps you to become aware of the presence of others and to develop a 
sense of the personhood of others – the sense of ‘you’ instead of an experience of ‘it’. 
Working in pairs, follow these instructions:

1 Sit face to face with your partner and close your eyes.
2 Be as you want to be.
3 Pay attention to your body sensations, posture and facial expression.
4 Make any necessary adjustments to your posture on the basis of your awareness, 

moment by moment.
5 When you feel comfortable and ready, open your eyes while remaining still.
6 Focus on the person sitting opposite you without making a conversation.
7 Be conscious of the fact that you are seeing this person as a person who truly 

exists.

Exercise 7: I/You

This effectively is an extension of exercises 5 and 6 (the first two in this section). The 
procedures include:

1 Practise exercise 5.
2 Practise exercise 6.
3 now focus on both ‘i’ and ‘you’, and at the same time evoke a sense of infinity 

around ‘i’ and ‘you’.
4 Speak silently: ‘i – you – infinity’.

Exercise 8: I – You – I

Work with a different partner and write down three traits of a person you admire 
and three traits of a person you do not admire. Then, in turn, say, ‘i am…’ followed 
by the traits you have listed.

You may find it hard to identify with the traits for either person – for different 
 reasons. For example, it is hard to say ‘i am brave’, as it feels like boasting; but it is 
also hard to say ‘i am rude’, as it feels very critical of oneself. Saying the negative traits 
helps you to realize that maybe you are also some of those things.

Level 2: Awareness of the continuum

These exercises help to heighten your awareness of actual needs, so they can be acted 
on. They help to bring to your attention things that you might otherwise not have 
noticed, such as the way you are sitting. in group exercises, pay particular attention to 
the moment of silence. A deeper silence may attract to it a deeper communication.

Exercise 9: Perception

This exercise takes a few minutes, so it is advisable to choose a time when you will not 
be  disturbed. Have a piece of paper and a pen at hand and try to focus on the follow-
ing sensations:



 Continuing Professional Development 161

•  sight;
•  sound;
•  texture;
•  taste;
•  smell;
•  bodily sensation.

Jot down each item (or draw a figure if it is an image) as you become aware of it. Stay 
with it until the next one develops and comes to the fore. For example:

•  the colour of the wallpaper;
•  the paintings on the wall;
•  the voices of other people;
•  the pressure of clothes against the skin on the back of the thighs;
•  a jagged tooth against your mouth;
•  a sour taste in the back of your mouth;
•  slight discomfort of your ankle;
•  moving your leg and relief of the discomfort.

You need to empty your mind of preoccupations and be as receptive as possible. You 
do not have to do all the senses. You may find that your receptivity and reverie incline 
you to be aware of certain senses (e.g. sight) rather than others (e.g. smell).

note that you become aware of one thing (the figure) and then it fades into the 
background (ground) and another figure takes its place. You become increasingly 
aware of the boundary between yourself and the outside.

Try not to think of what the noise, smell or sensation is, or why it is. Just be aware 
of the ebb and flow of your consciousness of the sensations. open yourself up to your 
environment. Be receptive.

Exercise 10: Living in the Moment

Repeat exercise 9 without writing anything down. You can do it anywhere where 
you can concentrate for a few minutes – for instance, when lying in the bath or sitting 
quietly outside.

Exercise 11: Monologue: Self-Reports

This is a group exercise. Working in a group of three, each person switches roles after 
10 minutes. There are three roles:

•  coachee/reporter/actor;
•  coach/listener/witness;
•  coach supervisor.

The actor and witness sit face to face with the coach sitting next to them. Repeat 
exercise 9 in a group. The actors recite in turn what they are aware of externally and 
internally.



162 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Instructions for the coachee (actor)
There are three basic realms of awareness: perception, feeling and action. in this 
exercise you emphasize, out of all your feelings about the occasion, the one that is 
grounded in perception; and in order to do this you use an action that mirrors 
your feeling. in other words, feel what you perceive and express your feeling 
through action. Report to the ‘listener’ your perception – what you see, hear, 
smell and so on – but emphasize how you feel about those perceptions. For 
example, you may say:

•  i could hear my own breathing and i feel relaxed.
•  As i speak, i could hear my own voice and i feel self-conscious.
•  now i’m aware of my heart beating.
•  now i’m aware of the sound of the air-conditioning unit.
•  now i feel distracted by the sound of traffic outside.

Instructions for the coach (listener)

•  Listen to what is being said.
•  observe the body language.
•  Act as a witness.
•  don’t give cues.
•  don’t respond to the speaker.
•  don’t approve or disapprove. For example, don’t smile or shrug your shoulders.
•  Keep still.
•  Be non-judgemental.
•  Adopt a meditative stance.
•  do nothing.
•  Be present.
•  Relax your face.
•  Relax your tongue.
•  don’t try to understand what the reporter says. You will notice that, by not  trying, 

you will understand better.
•  Put your effort into attending, both inside and outside.
•  Focus on your perception: what you see, what you hear – the voice and words of 

the speaker.
•  Focus also on how you yourself feel, moment to moment.

Instructions for the coach supervisor
The coach supervisor performs the supervision using a gestalt approach. The role is 
to ensure that the coachee (actor) and the coach (witness) observe the rules. Point 
out any infringement of rules. For example:

•  Point out that what is being said is not an expression of experience (e.g. in case 
someone was telling a story).

•  Point out the posture of the witness (e.g. if he or she did not appear to be relaxed).
•  draw the witnesses’ attention to what they should not do within the exercise 

(e.g. nod, smile, etc.).



 Continuing Professional Development 163

Level 3: Top dog/underdog

Exercise 12

This exercise is also known as the ‘empty chair’ technique or ‘three chair’ exercise. it 
takes at least 20 to 30 minutes and consists of four stages:

1 Self-accusation as a top dog Let the words, voice and gesture of emotion flow.
2 Underdog reversal Ask the actor to impersonate his or her underdog, its person-

ality, its attitude and so on. The underdog tells the top dog off in a full display of 
words and gesture.

3 Top dog reversal.
4 Working towards an agreement.

Work in a pair: one acts as a coach (sitting in one chair) and the other as a client 
(sitting in another chair); the third chair is left empty (see Figure 8.1.) if there are 
three or more participants, others can act as observers.

Coach:

•  Ask clients to express their concerns, objections, and doubts directly rather than 
in an abstract and generalized way.

•  Ask questions beginning with ‘How do you experience that now...?’ or ‘Tell me 
directly how you feel about this…’.

•  Get the clients to act out an unfinished situation, either by making them imagine 
the others to be in the room or by using actors. This helps clients to experience 
the psychological block and then to complete it in the present.

The coach’s assessment of what is happening, followed by active involvement, is 
essential. For example, client B describes his or her relationship with another person 
P and how B felt about P. The coach then asks the client to move to the empty chair 
and become P. Client B describes P’s personality and life in the first person, using 
expressions such as ‘how “i” felt about P’. B then moves back to his or her chair and 
describes his or her feelings towards P. Throughout this, the coach should pick up 
on aspects of how the clients change in their attitude and behaviours. For example, 
the coach may say to B: ‘The way you’re sitting as P, you’re almost looking down at 
people.’ This kind of feedback helps clients to see how they portray themselves and 
others. The exercise helps clients understand differently both the relationships and 
why other people act in certain ways.

Coach

Coachee 
Empty 
Chair

Figure 8.1 Three-chair exercise



164 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

When a client becomes P, you may notice a change in the tone of his or her voice; 
you may also notice that the client becomes much more aware of the environment 
when she or he is P rather than him-or herself.

Storytelling Exercises

narrative approaches typically involve coaches asking coachees to tell a story in order 
to recount an experience, and then prompting them, through follow-up questions, to 
connect the story with a concept they would like to explore. The story development 
may consist of the following plots:

•  re-authoring: story development rich in skills and knowledge;
•  re-authoring and remembering conversation: story development rich in skills and 

knowledge;
•  outsider witness (group exercise): retelling of the story;
•  definitional ceremony (community): retellings of retellings.

The re-authoring conversation

The goal of a re-authoring conversation is to redevelop coachees’ skills and knowledge 
by re-authoring the stories of their life experience. Re-authoring conversations pro-
vide a platform for participants to step into the near future of the landscapes of action 
of their lives. Questions are introduced that encourage the storytellers to generate 
proposals for action, accounts of the circumstances likely to be favourable to these 
proposals for action, and predictions about the outcome of these proposals. note that 
the narrative coach first needs to scaffold the rich story development in the landscape 
of consciousness before proceeding with the re-authoring questions. This exercise 
helps you to develop some of these questioning skills.

At first, participants are likely to respond to landscapes of consciousness questions 
by talking about various categories of their self-identity – such as attributes, character-
istics, deficits, drives, motives, needs, resources, strengths, traits, and so on. However, 
these responses may provide an inadequate basis for the coachees to proceed. in other 
words, the coachees get stuck. narrative coaches need to guide the storytellers with 
the help of alternative identities that are more positive and relevant to the empower-
ment of their lives. Try to discover the storytellers’ beliefs, commitments, intentions, 
purposes, values, visions, hopes and dreams.

Exercise 13: Developing Your Skills and Knowledge through  
a Re-Authoring Conversation Technique

Note for coaches and mentors
Use the following questions as a guide only. Remember, this is an informal conversation, 
not a formal interview. So talk as naturally as possible and develop your own questions 
as necessary. Pay particular attention to the answers and follow their lead.

1 Thank you for volunteering to talk to me. Can you remember a recent skill that 
you have acquired – or something that you have learnt? if you are happy with it, 
we shall explore it a bit further.



 Continuing Professional Development 165

2 Please tell me what happened.
3 if i were there, what would i see?
4 Was it easy or difficult to learn?
5 Can you remember, was there a significant moment or a ‘turning point’ at which 

you felt that you had overcome the difficulty?
6 When you accomplished this, what did you wish to have seen happening as a 

result?
7 Can you help me to understand your intentions or purposes in learning this 

skill? does this stem from any particular values or beliefs you hold in high regard? 
if so, what are they?

8 Looking back now, can you still say that those values/intentions/purposes are 
important to you?

9 Why is it important to you to have these sorts of intentions or purposes for what 
you do now?

10 So if you think about these values/beliefs, what hopes and dreams might they be 
connected to in your life?

11 When these values/beliefs are present, what would you be hoping for now, at 
this stage?

12 Can you give a name to the story you told me?

if you have time, ask the following questions:

1 Are there other things you’ve done recently that fit with what we’re discussing 
now, or are on the same theme?

2 Were there other times in your life when these themes/intentions/values/hopes/
dreams stood out?

3 What would i have seen you doing in the past that would indicate these themes/
intentions/values/hopes/dreams?

4 Can you give me an example from your earlier life that would reflect these themes/
intentions/values/hopes/dreams you hold dear?

5 What’s it like to be looking at your recent experience in light of this past event?

Finally:

1 What has it been like for you to have this conversation?
2 What does it make you think about in your own work?
3 What would you be able to do?
4 Are these themes/intentions/values/hopes/dreams sustainable? if so, what 

would be your next step, and would it support your themes/intentions/values/
hopes/dreams?

The remembering conversation

The remembering conversation, as a type of inquiry, is initiated in two stages. each 
stage consists of two steps. during the first stage, the coach invites the storyteller to

•  recount what a significant figure contributed to the storyteller’s life (figure’s con-
tribution to person’s life);



166 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  enter the consciousness of this figure on matters of the storyteller’s identity, initi-
ating a rich description of the ways in which this connection shaped, or had the 
potential to shape, the storyteller’s sense of who she or he is and what his or her 
life is about (person’s identity through the eyes of the figure).

in the second stage, the coach invites the storyteller to

•  recount what the storyteller contributed to the life of this figure (person’s contri-
bution to the figure’s life);

•  enter the consciousness of this figure on matters of this figure’s identity, initiating 
a rich description of the ways in which this connection shaped, or had the poten-
tial to shape, the figure’s sense of who she or he was and of what his or her life was 
about (implications of this contribution for the figure’s sense of identity).

Exercise 14: Developing Clients’ Skills and Knowledge  
through a Remembering Conversation Technique

Choose a theme around which the conversation will take place. Ask the clients to 
think about a person in their life who would not be surprised to see them reflecting 
on their work in the way they have been when they were telling you their stories.

Note for coaches
Use the following questions as a guide only. This is an informal conversation, 
not  a formal interview. So try to talk as naturally as possible and develop your 
own  questions as necessary. Pay particular attention to the answers and follow 
their lead.

establish a theme of intentions, commitments, principles, values, beliefs, hopes or 
dreams, and so on.

Remember: the identities of the significant figures whom the participants describe 
do not have to be directly known, as long as they have been important to the story-
teller (e.g. film stars, authors of books, or characters in movies or comics). These 
 figures need not be people; they may be, for instance, favourite pets or stuffed toys 
from their childhood memory.

1 Thank you for volunteering to talk to me. Could you please take some time to 
name one thing that is important to you and and talk about it? This could be part 
of the way you approach your work or your life, your intentions or your 
commitments.

2 Please tell me a little story that might help me understand your everyday experi-
ence of this approach/intention/commitment.

3 What beliefs/values about this way of working are important to you?
4 Can you think of someone in your life who would be least surprised to hear you 

talking about what is important to you, someone who would recognize and appre-
ciate these things? (if the clients have difficulties in thinking of someone, tell them 
that it might be someone from their early life, an aunt or an uncle, a grandparent 
or a parent, a teacher or a friend. This figure may not be alive any longer. nor does 
it need to be someone they have actually known, if they can’t think of one – it may 



 Continuing Professional Development 167

be a character from a favourite book, or a movie they remember. it may be a 
figure from history. They can choose a pet or a favourite toy that accompanied 
them through childhood. Any of these would be suitable for this remembering 
conversation.)

5 Can you tell me a bit about this person (let’s say X) as if you were introducing 
X to me–for example, X’s name, when and where you met, and suchlike?

6 Can you tell me something about what X may have brought to your life, or in 
what ways your life was influenced by X?

7 What do you think X invited you to be a part of, or to share?
8 How did X go about that?
9 is there an example that comes to mind of the sorts of things you and X did 

together that captures something of what you both shared?
10 What might X have recognized/appreciated in you that others had perhaps failed 

to notice?
11 Thinking back, what might you have done to receive X’s appreciation?
12 Were you responsive to X’s appreciation?
13 Were you honouring X’s contribution to your life?
14 did it bounce off you, or did it resonate with what is important to you?
15 What do you think it might have been like for X to have you join him or her in 

what was important to him or her?
16 What do you think it contributed to X’s life that you, in particular, were available 

to his or her interest and appreciation?
17 What effect do you think your contribution has had on X’s sense of purpose or 

sense of what life is about?
18 did it reinforce X’s purpose or did it take away from it?
19 Could you imagine how X would have felt if he or she were here now and 

hearing this conversation?

Finally:

20 What has it been like for you to have this conversation about you and X?
21 What do you think might become more possible for you in your work or life as 

a result of remembering your connection with X?
22 What in your own work or life does this remembering make you think about?
23 What will you be able to do now?
24 Are these themes/intentions/values/hopes/dreams sustainable? if so, what will 

the next step be that supports your themes/intentions/values/hopes/dreams?

Exercise 15: Group Exercise – Outsider Witness Retelling

This exercise can be carried out when you have three or more participants in your 
group. Repeat exercises 13 and 14, but this time invite one or more participants from 
the group to act as outsider witnesses. After the storyteller has told his or her story, 
invite the outsider witnesses to ask the questions, but give them the following instruc-
tions in advance, then ask them to organize their questions under the headings given 
below:



168 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Instructions for outsider witnesses during retelling
don’ts:

•  don’t give opinions about the storyteller.
•  don’t make declarations about the storyteller’s self-identity.
•  don’t hold up your own lives and actions as examples to the storyteller.
•  don’t introduce moral tales.

dos:

•  Listen.
•  Talk about what was heard.

Remember: the initial storyteller should always be at the centre of the definitional 
ceremony. if the outsider witnesses were carried away and began to talk about them-
selves and their own stories predominantly, remind them to re-focus on the primary 
storyteller (T). For example, ‘can i interrupt you there, do you think that is relevant 
to T’s life?’ or ‘how do you think T would feel about that?’

Identifying the expression
As you listen to the story of T, which expressions caught your attention or captured 
your imagination? Which one’s struck a chord for you?

Describing the image
What images did T’s expressions of his or her life, identity, and his or her world evoke 
in your mind? What did these expressions suggest to you about T’s beliefs, commit-
ments purposes, values, hopes, and dreams?

Embodying responses
What is it about your own life or work that the story has accounted for? Why did these 
expressions catch your attention or strike a chord in you? do you have a sense of the 
images evoked by these expressions in your own life experiences? Which aspects of 
your own life experiences resonated with these expressions?

Acknowledging transport
How have you been moved as a result of being present to witness this story? Where 
has this experience taken you – to what place that you would not have reached if you 
hadn’t been present in the audience to this conversation? in what way have you 
become who you are on account of responding to these stories as you have?

Exercise 16: The Definitional Ceremony (Community):  
Retellings of Retellings

This exercise is applicable to large groups like conference and community gatherings. 
A definitional ceremony may have the following stages:

1 At the outset, the participants meet and sit in a large circle. Some of them intro-
duce and address the chosen themes. These may relate to personal stories or to 
community folklore.



 Continuing Professional Development 169

2 The participants who have introduced the theme invite those in the large circle to 
break into smaller groups, for the purpose of having conversations that will con-
tribute to linking the stories of other participants to these themes. one or two 
team members join each of the small groups, as outsider witnesses to their conver-
sations. The participants from each small group negotiate what aspects of the 
story should be reported by the outsider witnesses.

3 The large circle reconvenes. now these team members sit together, with the out-
sider witnesses, either at the centre or at the periphery of the circle. The outsider 
witnesses of each group retell what they heard and experienced in the small group 
conversations. (This may take up to 30 minutes per group.)

4 Having retold the story, each outsider witness rejoins the large circle. The story-
teller then reflects on what he or she has heard.

Narrative Psychodrama: Physical Exercises

As mentioned in Chapter 7, narrative coaching relies heavily on the articulation of 
stories by the clients, but the approach may be limited if coaches or mentors rely on 
verbal communication only. narrative psychodrama offers a powerful alternative, 
through which unspoken stories may find physical expression. The exercises described 
in this section would be of particular interest for those readers who are interested in 
alternative coaching approaches, especially in dancing and other creative methods.

narrative psychodrama has a transpersonal psychological dimension too. Through 
authentic movements, coaches may develop certain attitudes and postures. The exer-
cises described below are based on the experience of performance coaching. The con-
cept has been adopted from the philosophy of paratheatre (Alli, 1977). The approach 
is invaluable for coaches and coachees, as it focuses on both mind and body. it offers 
a novel way of preparing one’s readiness for change, both psychologically and 
physically.

The exercises can be performed on one’s own as well as in groups. if the group 
exercises are conducted with a coach or a facilitator, that person should take respon-
sibility for health and safety aspects and ensure that they are observed. The following 
sequence of exercises is outlined in the next sections:

1 Stage 1: preparation/initiation;
2 Stage 2: the physical warm-up cycle;
3 Stage 3: breathing and balancing exercises;
4 Stage 4: the flow movement;
5 Stage 5: acting out.

in paratheatre, Antero Alli (2003) called the last three stages of the above sequence 
‘no-form’ (towards intimacy with void), ‘the contact point’ (the concept-free zone of 
direct intuitive engagement), and ‘polarizations’ (towards emotional flexibility and 
strength) respectively. This initial sequence (Stage 1) is explored in an asocial, non-
performance environment. According to the paratheatre concept, an ‘asocial’ attitude 
relates to the vertical sources of energy, which has a spiritual and transpersonal quality. 
An assumption here is that each person has inner energy and a hidden agenda. These 
vertical sources of energy are above, within and below the body itself and can be felt 



170 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

as a stream of inner impulses. From the perspective of the ‘asocial’ attitude, these 
inner forces can be witnessed, experienced and made to serve to discover one’s innate 
intentions. The quality of these intentions may be symbolically characterized by 
certain elements. For example, one’s innate agenda to generate heat or to illuminate 
may be expressed as an element of ‘fire’. With practice, this preparatory ‘asocial’ stage 
becomes invaluable for increasing awareness of our social conditioning and of the 
underlying forces that govern our existence (the so-called archetypes). This stage also 
helps one to assess one’s vertical sources of energy and be authentic. Alli (2003) 
regards this process as ‘building [one’s] vertical integrity’.

The next stage involves a cycle of physical warm-up exercises. The overall objective 
is to feel one’s body deeply. The quality of your performance depends on the level of 
personal commitment to the exercises. The breathing and balancing exercises help 
one to achieve a state of psychological emptiness by consciously directing attention to 
exhalation in a standing position.

The flow

The concept of flow has an affinity with Csikszentmihalyi’s (1991) idea of flow. indeed 
this may be a physical way of allowing one direct access to an optimal experience. The 
concept also reminds one of the saying ‘go with the flow’. The approach is nondirec-
tional and has no social intent. Here you give your body primacy to direct your 
movement; you allow the energy itself to give the direction. To achieve this, you need 
to relax. Relaxing creates a space for the expression of your physical energy. You are 
moved by the energy rather than moving at your will. Alli says: ‘Like clay in the hands 
of a sculptor, we learn to be shaped before we start shaping. Allow yourself to be “cre-
ated” before you start creating.’ This statement relates to gestalt psychology too.

Acting out

The overall objective of a coaching exercise is to enable change to take place. Like 
gestalt exercises, this final stage effectively secures a ‘physical rehearsal’ for one to act 
out fear; and it also provides the agenda for change. Like in cognitive behavioural 
coaching, before you perform change, you need to identify the barriers and to devise 
a strategy for overcoming them. Acting out physically, the exercise invites you to make 
two lists. The first is a ‘dirt list’, which comprises emotionally charged, embarrassing 
or difficult experiences and their opposites. Very often people live through their inner 
embarrassment and psychological barriers helplessly. The exercise allows you to act 
out these experiences in a physical drama and movement. The acting out of the ‘dirt 
list’ is an important prerequisite for change as it clears the space, renders the ‘emo-
tional ego’ more flexible and allows you to prepare to face up to reality. The exercise 
also helps you to realize that the ‘self ’ has more than one facet.

What comes after these exercises depends on the direction suggested by the coach 
or facilitator. Coachees may like to discuss the new list with the coach, as an agenda 
for change (the ‘dirt list’ remains private and safe). other techniques, for instance 
CBT, may follow, depending on context and preferences. in a group situation such as 
a team-building exercise, the group may decide collectively on an agenda for change 
that fits with its members’ organizational or social context.



 Continuing Professional Development 171

Exercise 17: Preparation/Initiation

The object of the preparation (the term used of it is also ‘initiation’, as in a ritual) 
is to help the participants to increase their spatial awareness. (if one carries out 
preparation by oneself alone, this becomes a self-initiation.) This initial stage pro-
vides two sub-stages designed to increase your accountability for your own creative 
states:

1 Take responsibility.
2 Find your own way.

Instructions for taking responsibility
Take the following unspoken vow:

•  each individual takes responsibility for his or her own creative states.
•  Take responsibility for your own safety.
•  Take responsibility for raising your own energy level.

The vow ensures your personal commitment to pay attention to your fears, needs and 
personal limitations as they emerge. if you overlook these, you may become dependent 
and expect to be looked after by others for your safety and so on. ensure that you 
have a ‘safe space’. This prepares the ground for creativity: ‘When a child feels safe, it 
can play.’ Creativity flourishes in a state of trust. Paradoxically, feeling safe also allows 
you to take risks.

now, consciously divert your attention from yourself (and from others, if you are 
in a group; or from objects such as furniture and the like). Redirect it to the ‘space’ 
itself as a ‘value’. This literally means relating to the space, that is, to the setting 
(which may be a conference room, a dance studio and so on).

Find your own way
When you are ready, move through the space of the actual setting in such a way as to 
continually relate to the space itself, rather than to the people or objects in that space.

Before you begin your physical warm-up, you may need to find your own space. 
This could include the following steps:

1 Physically move through the space within the setting.
2 Locate a small region of that space to claim as your own personal warm-up area.

When you have discovered your personal space, make a conscious effort to ‘own’ it. 
Mark it with your territorial instincts – in Alli’s (2003) words, ‘like animals stalk and 
claim turf. Find your own idiosyncratic ways to mark the outer boundaries, the centre 
and then proceed to take charge of this area.’

Exercise 18: The Physical Warm-Up Cycle

The physical warm-up exercises consist of a cycle of four steps: keep still, flex, stretch 
and move. each step lasts between 5 and 10 minutes. Repeat the sequence of steps in 
a cycle for about 20 to 40 minutes, depending on your time constraints.



172 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

1 Keep still – adopt any posture that allows you to be physically still. engage internal 
thoughts, then empty them. You may choose to meditate or pray silently, depend-
ing on your belief or religion.

2 Flex your spine.
3 Stretch and take a deep breath at the same time – feel your body deeply. Try to 

locate any ‘numb’ areas in your body and stretch them. Try to perform the exercise 
within the limit of your physical comfort.

4 Move – now move freely within your personal area, with an objective of gener-
ating enough body heat to work up a sweat. Continue to move to contain the heat 
and to mark your boundaries through your movements. Stay within your own 
personal warm-up area. This helps you to accumulate and contain the vital energy, 
heat and presence within your own space.

Exercise 19: Breathing and Balancing Exercises

in a standing position, do the following:

1 Watch your own breath; emphasize your exhalation.
2 Relax. do not try to control or direct your body. Adjust your physical stance as 

necessary for maintaining a balance and supporting the spinal alignment. Allow 
your body to stand and rest in a state of vertical posture.

3 Stay empty – try to approach a psychological state of emptiness. Bypass any dis-
traction such as ‘internal chatter’ or ‘dissociated imagery’.

Exercise 20: The Flow Movement

This exercise consists of free movements that go with the flow:

1 Remain relaxed.
2 Become aware of your physical energy. Follow it. do not resist it. When you feel 

that the force of this energy is strong enough to move your body, follow its 
direction. do not allow yourself any desire to control or direct the energy.

3 Move with the flow.

Exercise 21: Acting Out

This stage involves acting out some of one’s personal emotional difficulties. The pro-
cess may take the following steps:

1 introspectively examine your own most personal experiences.
2 Make a ‘dirt list’ – in your mind, draw up a list of difficult experiences, especially 

those that are regarded by you as ‘not socially acceptable’ or as opposite to your 
‘normal good nature’. These may be very private and highly charged with 
emotion.

3 Make an expression (acting out) – select an item on the list, give it an expression 
in a physical form. Act it all out. do not take yourself too seriously. do not be 
afraid of making a fool out of yourself. if you do feel too afraid to act out, or if 
you become too self-conscious (this could happen in particular in a group 



 Continuing Professional Development 173

situation), express this awkwardness by giving it a physical form – in movement or 
posture, if you feel immobilized by it.

4 Make a ‘new list’ – repeat Step 3, but this time make a list of items that are directly 
opposite to those on the dirt list. Some of these items may be based on your expe-
rience. if they are not, you may choose to invent it as long as it is directly opposite 
to the one in Step 3.

5 Make a change – repeat Step 3, but this time select the item from your ‘new list’ 
in Step 4 and give it a physical expression.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

if you have attempted to practise all the exercises described in this chapter, you will 
have noticed that some of the techniques may be mutually exclusive, while others are 
complementary to each other. For instance, gestalt mentors never ask mentees ‘Why?’, 
while  narrative coaches question every thin trace of a story. However, it is important 
to realize that both approaches are transpersonal in nature. Also, both approaches 
 perform the transformation at the moment of being present, although the gestalt 
approach primarily emphasizes the moment-to-moment continuity or duration of 
being here and now. Like any skill, be it competence in gestalt expressions or compe-
tence in the scaffolding questions of narrative approaches, this one is acquired through 
practice, more practice and then more practice still.

on the other hand, the narrative psychodrama relates to gestalt psychology very 
well. it regards the body as an instrument – in this case a vessel – ‘for containing, 
 mixing, transforming and refining the ongoing union of opposites’ – an instrument 
through which ‘top dog’ and ‘underdog’ are in interplay as the movements unfold. 
The approach also has an alchemic quality. in gestalt coaching, the transformation – 
for instance, the perception of time cognitively (mental time) – has to be experienced 
though one’s body, physically (in body time); it cannot be taught. You discover your 
own way through your experience, through your body, through physical movements, 
with all your senses.

You can adapt your own coaching or mentoring approach to suit your circum-
stances and to meet the needs of the learner. While techniques might vary, the iLS 
may be used as an overarching structure, within which you can select appropriate 
approaches that would help you scaffold your learning and practice. Whether you are 
a gestalt, a CBT or a narrative therapist, a coach or a mentor, working with executives 
or former offenders, i hope there is something here you can take away and put into 
 practice. After all, this is about thinking and doing things in new ways.

i shall illustrate the above exercises in some of the case studies in Chapter 9.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Case Studies

Introduction

This chapter provides a number of case studies derived from various mentoring and 
coaching programmes. They aim to show how theories can be applied in practice. each 
case is structured according to the action research and learning process: it consists of 
planning (aims/objectives); action (the process of implementation); reflection and 
evaluation of the lessons learnt from the experience. i hope that you will gain insight 
into what makes for successful coaching and mentoring. To demonstrate how the 
universal integrated framework (UiF)/ integrative learning system (iLS) works, i have 
taken care to select case studies from applications that have either an international or 
cross-cultural dimension or a socio-community element. The case studies cover:

•  leadership coaching and mentoring programmes for the healthcare system (case 
studies 1 and 2);

•  e-coaching – a transatlantic coaching pilot project (case study 3);
•  coaching in communities (case studies 4 and 5).

Under the current economic climate, organizations are under pressure to increase 
productivity and efficiency and at the same time to reduce cost. This requires leaders 
to motivate employees rather than using traditional management methods of 
transformational and inspirational leadership (Alban-Metcalfe and Mead, 2010; 
Alimo-Metcalfe and Alban Metcalfe, 2005). The pressure to improve effectiveness 
and efficiency is even more acute in the healthcare sector, with its increased number 
of patients with acute conditions and the complex challenges of rising costs, contin-
uous organizational change, multiple disciplinary management hierarchies and high 
staff turnover (Lee et al., 2010; Storey, 2010; Contino, 2004; Hartman and Crow, 
2002; Mathena, 2002; McAlearney, 2006).

9



176 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

The traditional hierarchical and bureaucratic organizational model is no longer 
compatible with the new complexities of the healthcare system (McAlearney, 2006). 
The de-centralization of the healthcare system has also placed pressure on ward man-
agers at the mid-management level to increase performance (Casida, 2007). However, 
ward managers may not have been prepared to assume leadership roles (Mathena, 
2002; Grindel, 2003). Therefore, developing leadership capacity at both senior and 
middle management levels has become an urgently needed item on the agenda of 
change in the healthcare system. one way to meet this challenge is to embed learning 
within the organization through leadership coaching.

Case studies 1 and 2 provide examples of how leadership coaching may be intro-
duced into the healthcare system. Case study 1 is based on the initial UiF development 
in the healthcare sector in the UK. Case study 2 shows how a leadership coaching 
programme can be introduced in a general hospital in Malta.

Case study 3 describes a transatlantic coaching pilot project undertaken in 2005, 
which was coordinated by Frank Bresser as part of his MBA (master of business 
administration) research (Bresser, 2006a, 2006b). The case study is based on an inter-
esting collaboration between the British Association for Coaching and Rice University, 
Houston, Texas. it also demonstrates the advantages and difficulties of telephone 
coaching that uses internet technology or traditional telephone systems. it includes 
encouraging feedback from the coordinator, coaches and coachees; this feedback is 
based on a quantitative questionnaire and a qualitative reflection.

Case studies 4 and 5 describe how we can apply the skills and knowledge of coach-
ing in the community context. Case study 4 shows how i applied the narrative 
approach and the learning i gained from the international narrative Therapy work-
shop and conference in Adelaide, Australia, to a community in Peterborough, england. 
The case study demonstrates the power of storytelling by using the metaphor of a 
journey and the definitional ceremony to bring together different communities. it 
also depicts the challenges and difficulties that coaches and mentors face when trans-
porting ideas across places, spaces and cultures. Such challenges include the correct 
interpretation of sameness and difference among the opinions, interests and values of 
the divergent multi-partnerships and stakeholders – as well as socio-geographical 
factors like the weather.

Case Study 1: Leadership Coaching and Mentoring 
Programme in the Healthcare Setting: UK

The coaching and mentoring programme was part of an agreed leadership development 
strategy, which was intended to promote leadership capability in a region. There were 
two main priorities or targeted streams within the leadership cohort:

1 the black and ethnic minority (BMe) leaders, who remained under-represented at 
senior levels (the BMe leadership stream or project);

2 those leaders who were acting as change facilitators, to accelerate the spread of 
good practice in an ambitious improvement programme (the ‘Change’ or coach-
ing for change stream or project).



 Case Studies 177

Aims and objectives

The aim was to train delegates from the cohort groups in coaching and mentoring in 
a way that was relevant to their context.

The process

each delegate was selected for training over five days and agreed to commit to men-
toring and coaching for up to four days over a 12-month period. All of them were 
introduced to the UiF via a spectrum of coaching and mentoring techniques and 
practical exercises.

The change facilitators learnt about change theories and approaches and practised 
their techniques in a relevant context. They focused on the cross-cultural implications 
of transferring good practice from one environment to another. This concept of trans-
ferring practice had been shown to be particularly problematic: there were variations 
in performance on key health and social deliverables across the region despite 
knowledge about good healthcare practice being readily available and centres of ex-
cellence being well cited locally.

The BMe leaders looked at the cross-cultural context for the application of their 
skills, so that they could work with other minority leaders to support them in their 
career development. At the same time a national programme trained senior managers 
to coach and mentor BMe leaders in more junior positions. This extended the partici-
pating pool of coaches and mentors. in turn, each delegate in both streams was 
offered a mentor of his or her own. After some months, mentors were offered the 
chance to undertake supervisor training and then widen their roles by becoming 
supervisors, too.

Matching
After the training, individuals were matched with mentees who had received training 
in the coaching process. despite the use of a criterion-based matching approach, the 
coordinator noted that much of the process required brokering between the two 
parties involved. Those individuals who selected a mentor without coaching and men-
toring training were least satisfied three months later. experienced mentees were most 
able to be independent at this stage, and those who had relied on just the paper-led 
matching service were less likely to end up in a mentoring pairing after the first session.

Core coaching and mentoring training
Both cohorts received five days of core training. This covered basic coaching and 
mentoring skills and extended periods of context awareness building, so that the 
cohorts could appreciate their environment of application and the particular issues 
and barriers to effective movement across boundaries. in the Change project, this 
related to the transfer of practice across geographical boundaries, professional bound-
aries, political boundaries, technological, structural and self-limiting belief bound-
aries. The training focus was on techniques designed to develop a deep understanding 
of the environment of operation and the main players; this included recognizing the 
risks to successful change implementation at each stage and developing mindfulness 
at each transition.



178 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

in the BMe leadership stream, the boundaries were considered to mark inclusion 
(political, structural, policy, communication and knowledge boundaries and self-lim-
iting beliefs). The added training emphasis incorporated the notion of personal accul-
turation, storytelling, developing wider system knowledge and understanding of 
others’ perspectives, political awareness and personal confidence.

Supporting the process
When individuals started the coaching process they signed contracts with one another 
and both parties agreed to come to CPd (continuous professional development). 
The coordinator offered a range of developmental opportunities to suit all tastes – 
from groups of mentees to mixed groups of mentors and mentees to groups of men-
tors. As many people performed both roles at different times, their choice of event 
was interesting. All events were supported and, over the 12 months, everyone under-
took supervision in some form or another. The most stimulating events, which 
blended formal CPd with informal chances to discuss areas of interest or concern, 
were the mixed role events. Some delegates used their experience of one role to 
inform another role.

other individuals talked to mentors other than their own and vice versa and trans-
ferred the knowledge back into their own mentoring relationships. Most senior men-
tors described the CPd sessions as ‘unexpectedly insightful and extremely useful’ for 
their leadership and mentoring role.

As CPd was rolled out across settings, different patterns emerged; but probably the 
most successful type was the one based on action learning. This was probably because 
action learning was already embedded in the organization, as a development method. 
Coaching, mentoring and action learning are natural partners and together can bridge 
the individual and collective learning gap.

Reflection

Early learning
Typically there were some early teething problems. Some participants went into the 
process looking for a quick fix to problems and, having experienced some ‘quick wins’ 
on points of information, they struggled to adjust to the process. They were encour-
aged to review expectations, redefine goals and be open to learning in unexpected 
ways. in many cases their blockage mirrored the concept of delay in gratification 
described earlier, and also a natural resistance to new ways of learning. Coordinator 
support at these points and a focus on building up mentee knowledge and skills to 
lead the process ensured that few people quit or changed mentors. Those who 
ex perienced problems early on tended to describe the process even more positively, 
having overcome those difficulties.

The other lesson was that the ‘eureka!’ or ‘Aha!’ moments were very likely to arrive 
outside coaching and mentoring sessions, in later reflection, and that the time lag 
before the benefits showed up could run into weeks and months. in the BMe leader-
ship stream, we found that those mentees who selected BMe mentors often sought a 
change of mentor or an additional mentor sooner than expected. This emphasized the 
fact that, for many participants, initial homogenous matching had a significant but 
limited value.



 Case Studies 179

Evaluation: 12 months later
We can evaluate the impact of the coaching and mentoring programme by using the 
UiF/iLS framework – that is, by examining success along four dimensions:

1 personal;
2 social;
3 cultural/organizational;
4 professional.

We shall describe these dimensions in turn. There were quite a few surprises at a 
number of levels.

At the personal level The BMe cohort was now well established. individual mentees 
described expanded job roles and half of the delegates in the first training programme 
had been promoted. The learning from the programme emphasized the importance 
of a flexible understanding of culture in all its forms. All the individuals, be they 
coaches, mentors or mentees, identified with different parts of the process. Gender 
perceptions, inter-racial perceptions, issues about how power was perceived, the 
value of career success in hierarchical terms – all these were experienced differently by 
them all. This was the result of their unique identities, which in many cases were self- 
determined in the context of a different experience of socialization. However, for the 
most part, the shared experience of a standard British education or training system 
generated a common understanding. Likewise, working for the national Health 
Service or for social services develops a strong sense of alignment with the community 
of service users, and with it comes an understanding of majority culture.

At the social level There were far-reaching alliances between people, and some suc-
cessful pairs managed to find common values and ways that worked, despite pro-
ceeding from diverse starting points. Mentors in the BMe stream who were drawn 
from the ranks of senior management and did not have a BMe background seemed 
to benefit enormously. They stated that they had found the mentees challenging, 
probing and exciting to be with. This impact was, no doubt, enhanced by the empow-
erment that BMe mentors had experienced as a result of their coaching and mentor-
ing training, which helped them to steer the process so as to make it meet their own 
learning needs.

At the organizational/cultural level The programme of change was followed by a 
major restructuring of the organization. As result, the formal, funded coaching and 
mentoring programme for both cohort groups was indefinitely delayed. However, the 
informal infrastructure that was in place and was based on training, multiple roles and 
a network of supervisors ensured that, where there was a champion of coaching and 
mentoring, the programme had a development process embedded in it that supported 
change. As a result, the coaching and mentoring programme was integrated into the 
mainstream of leadership and change in some areas, becoming aligned with the core 
business and inherently sustainable – even without funding. in areas where there were 
no champions, the programme fizzled out rapidly.



180 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

BMe leaders got more involved in wider roles and became generic coaches or 
 mentors working in the area of change. They also got involved in coaching and men-
toring senior managers on how to make the most of the variegated talent pool in their 
own organizations. They continued to supervise others from the mixed cohort of 
coaches and mentors. directly or indirectly, their involvement in coaching and mentor-
ing ensured a so-called marginalized group got closer to the core and power base of 
the organization. Those individuals were also better able to work on the change and 
improvement agenda that the organization valued, and as a result they came more to 
be valued for their contribution. The BMe and Change cohorts exchanged their 
knowledge, which was further diffused into other areas of healthcare practice.

At the professional level in the online assessment of competency in leadership, BMe 
leaders scored consistently above their pay scale expectations; they also demonstrated 
a higher orientation to change than the rest of the sample. This same group also 
received the highest mentor performance feedback in a bespoke 360-degree feedback 
tool (this will be discussed in Chapter 10). There may be a link between undertaking 
the coaching and mentoring training and improving general leadership effectiveness, 
because coaching is in itself a style of leadership. This notion fits in with the concept 
of a coaching culture (Clutterbuck and Megginson, 2005).

The scores for mentor performance feedback from both the BMe stream and the 
Change stream were significantly above the scores for those who had received other 
coaching or mentorong training. This could be put down to factors like the length of 
training or the UiF emphasis.

Two years on
Where there are champions from the original cohorts, coaching and mentoring still 
flourish in two years’ time, and they are delivering evidence-based improvements to 
patient care and to the leadership capability of a stretched service. it took the BMe 
leaders some real drive and courage to champion diversity within the organization. 
A shared commitment went beyond goals, targets, hierarchical structures and ring-
fenced budgets. However, in the largest part of the healthcare sector in the region, 
the general coaching and mentoring programme was uncoordinated and sporadic, as 
no specific funding had been assigned to it. The BMe coaching and mentoring 
programme expanded beyond the region and was adopted nationally, and funding 
was assigned for its continuing development.

Seven years on
despite the funding cut under the current economic climate, the national BMe 
coaching and mentoring programme continues to expand in various regions in the 
UK. At the time of preparing this second edition, i could still observe pockets of 
 initiatives running in London.

Learning
one thing that this case study demonstrates is the importance of planning for coaching 
and mentoring and of ensuring that any programme is capable of sustainability beyond 
the limits of short-time funding. external and internal funding and resourcing entities 
can work in partnership with coaching and mentoring agencies from the outset, to 



 Case Studies 181

emphasize the transitory nature of funding and to work towards the mainstreaming of 
coaching and mentoring as part of their key service or business delivery. They can:

•  help these agencies set up sustainable plans for coaching, which are built around 
the identification of informed and strategic champions;

•  develop strategic alignments on core business or service areas they support;
•  encourage flexibility in programme design, which is contextualized in key areas of 

improvement;
•  promote fluidity between roles, so that coaching is able to reproduce capability 

and capacity organically;
•  embed supervision into existing organizational learning practices, so as to work 

towards the promotion of these organizations as coaching cultures (Clutterbuck 
and Megginson, 2005), in an extension of the learning organization model dis-
cussed in Chapter 5.

Such a strategic alliance between the funder or the funding arm and the agency 
encourages the latter to focus on the sustainability of the coaching and mentoring 
process as a condition of receiving funding. As we will see in Chapter 10, there is still 
a need to evaluate the outcomes of coaching and mentoring for all stakeholders.

Case Study 2: Leadership Coaching Programme  
in the Healthcare Setting: Malta

This pilot study describes how a leadership coaching programme was being introduced 
in the healthcare sector in Malta using the action research process. The coaching 
approaches include a range of eclectic methods. The analytical tools used in the reflec-
tive stages include thematic analyses and a systems approach. The study also shows how 
the UiF/iLS may be used to identify the impact of the programme.

Aims and objectives

The pilot study aims to show how a leadership coaching programme may be imple-
mented for nurse ward managers in a general hospital, with the following objectives:

•  to identify the perceived idealized leadership attributes (iLA);
•  to identify the skill gap in leadership;
•  to inform the management on how to implement a comprehensive coaching 

program;
•  to identify the impact of the programme.

The process

The coaching programme was implemented at Mater dei Hospital, which is the largest 
hospital for acute diseases in Malta. The target population was all the nurse ward man-
agers of the hospital. Twelve ward managers were randomly chosen from six depart-
ments (two from each department) – seven females and five males, aged between 32 



182 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

and 46. The programme consisted of four one-to-one coaching sessions. The coaching 
process of each session followed the GRoW model (Whitmore, 2002), with a range of 
coaching methods embedded as appropriate.

The programme was introduced according to the action research process – in other 
words it consisted of three steps:

1 planning;
2 action;
3 reflection.

This process was iterated in two cycles or phases.

Phase 1
At this stage planning consists of:

1 arranging the meeting with the director of nursing to discuss organizational objec-
tives to be met and to agree on the agenda for the focus groups and coaching 
programme;

2 conducting stratified random sampling to select the participants;
3 making decisions about an action plan and scheduling the first focus group;
4 developing the iLA exercise as a pilot.

Action here means:

1 implementing the first pilot focus group by using a nominal group facilitation 
technique;

2 conducting two one-to-one coaching sessions;
3 meeting the group to validate the coaching themes that emerged from the focus 

group discussion and to decide the way forward for the second phase.

Reflection (see next section)

Phase 2
Planning consists of:

1 developing a template for the coaching log;
2 revising the iLA exercise;
3 planning the Phase 2 implementation.

Action consists of:

1 communicating the updated iLA to the participants;
2 implementing the Phase 2 coaching sessions;
3 conducting the final focus group.

Reflection (see next section).



 Case Studies 183

Reflection
The experience gained in Phase 1 suggests that coaching tools need to be made more 
compact and that integrating the GRoW model into the coaching process is helpful 
to goal attainment. The following four themes emerge from the thematic analysis of 
the first focus group discussion transcripts:

1 intrinsic values: honesty, loyalty, fairness, empathy and trustworthiness are 
regarded as central components of idealized leadership. These values combine to 
form an ethical foundation for any life situation.

2 Vision: one needs to understand the organizational vision as well as one’s own. 
These visions need to be congruent with one’s behaviour.

3 Visibility: being visible and having a presence at work helps to inspire others in the 
team and makes the leader act as a role model in the promotion of ethical values. 
it also helps leaders remain in control and better connected to the team. This 
improves team communication and management.

4 Assertiveness: being assertive gives one a sense of empowerment to realize the 
vision and competence as a role model.

The thematic analyses of the second focus group discussion in Phase 2 identified 27 
idealized leadership attributes of nurse managers. These are:

1 authenticity: honesty, integrity, fairness, equality, transparency, respect, self- 
awareness, trustworthiness, loyalty, ethical behaviour, role modelling, openness 
to criticism, acknowledging mistakes;

2 responsibility: accountability, reliability, dependability, dedication, fidelity, con-
stancy, consistency, commitment, self-discipline;

3 collaboration: teamwork, communication, cooperation, partnership, solidarity, 
support, conflict management, consensus building;

4 caring: empathy, concern, compassion, dignity, kindness, generosity, nurturance, 
helpfulness, consideration, understanding;

5 excellence: high quality, competence, skills, high standards, aptitude, profession-
alism, effectiveness, evidence-based practice;

6 safety: security, protection, well-being, risk containment;
7 empowerment; involvement, power sharing, delegation, broad-mindedness, 

freedom, self-determination, autonomy, non-blame culture;
8 influence: authority, power, decisiveness, assertiveness, command, control, 

confidence;
9 growth: development, coaching, learning, guidance, counsel, mentoring, sup-

porting, challenging, knowledge sharing;
10 vision: clarity, strategy, purposefulness, direction, future-mindedness, being 

 proactive, having initiative;
11 visibility: support, presence, instruction, supervision, accessibility, role modelling;
12 contribution: serving others, making a difference, leaving a legacy, altruism, 

 generosity, selflessness, abundance mentality;
13 patience: serenity, flexibility, tolerance, endurance, temperance;
14 inspiration: passion, optimism, encouragement, engagement, charisma, motiva-

tion, energizing, confidence, stimulation, humour;



184 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

15 determination: resolve, certainty, fortitude, hardiness, resilience, persistence, 
perseverance, steadfastness;

16 courage: daring, boldness, challenge, risk-taking, audaciousness, non-conformity;
17 orderliness: tidiness, neatness, structure, efficiency, organization;
18 appreciation: praising, thanking, gratitude, acknowledging, rewarding, grateful-

ness, cherishing;
19 creativity: originality, inventiveness, innovativeness, imagination, ingenuity, 

resourcefulness;
20 humility: serving others, modesty, humbleness, gentleness, reserve;
21 diligence: duty, industry, accountability, conscientiousness, self-discipline;
22 pragmatism: practicality, realism, sensibleness, factuality, expediency, feasibility, 

convenience;
23 prudence: carefulness, cautiousness, non-risk decisions, discretion;
24 reputation: status, esteem, standing, popularity, admiration, recognition;
25 ambition: achievement, results, success, accomplishment, being the best, compe-

tition, superiority, pride, winning spirit, drive, sense of triumph, territorialism;
26 meticulousness: precision, accuracy, perfection, exactness, thoroughness;
27 conformity: stability, constancy, compliance, observance, conventionality.

To show the complex interrelationship between the above leadership attributes 
and the system environment, a healthcare leadership development system (HLdS) 
is developed using a general systems mapping approach (Shams and Law, 2012). 
Figure 9.1 shows such a general HLdS in relation to the coaching intervention.

Coaching and mentoring initiatives

Coaching

Internal
coach /
mentor

Patient
Ward managers 

and team
leader

Team
coaching

Affiliative

Influence

Empowerment

Excellence

Authentic

Transformational

Leadership styles

HLDS

Shared vision

Coaching
champion

Senior
management

Public Government

Attributes

Impact
evaluation

Customer
satisfaction and

well-being

Organizational
performance

Vision

Visibility

Congruence

Caring

Self-awareness

Figure 9.1 A healthcare leadership development system (HLdS) that shows leadership 
coaching to be embedded as part of it



 Case Studies 185

The ward managers stated that the process helped with identifying both their 
strengths and their areas of development. it also confirmed the need to provide a 
360-degree feedback as part of the developmental process. The managers’ knowledge 
and insights into leadership attributes were increased. it was concluded that coaching 
should be embedded as part of the organizational culture, such that it becomes avail-
able to all ward managers. The following elements should be integrated as part of a 
leadership culture:

•  Formal training: introduces basic coaching and leadership development.
•  individual coaching: facilitates self-awareness and the identification of organiza-

tional and personal goals, personal core values, leadership strengths and areas of 
development.

•  Group coaching: stimulates sharing ideas and learning.

The feedback also confirms that four sessions of coaching intervention were effective 
in terms of achieving a number of tangible organizational goals. These included 
changes in the medication distribution systems, enhanced interdisciplinary docu-
mentation, and the development of training programmes and standard operating 
procedures.

Learning

The learning could be organized according to the structure of the UiF/iLS:

Personal qualities:

•  increase one’s self-awareness;
•  enhance one’s understanding of one’s own core values, beliefs and behaviour;
•  identify one’s personal strengths and areas of development;
•  enhance one’s expertise;
•  achieve one’s personal and professional goals;
•  develop one’s accountability and leadership;
•  develop one’s insights and multiple perspectives;
•  make one learn about creativity, ‘out of the box’ thinking and flexibility;
•  increase one’s resilience and self-assurance;
•  develop a positive outlook;
•  develop authenticity and mindfulness;
•  develop openness to discuss concerns;

Social competence:

•  develops communication skills;
•  develops conflict and anger management;
•  makes one appreciate and respect others;
•  makes one learn to delegate;
•  makes one act as a role model;
•  opens one to criticism and feedback from others;



186 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

cultural and organizational competence:

•  builds cultural bonds to enhance collective consciousness;
•  develops new ways to enhance teamwork;
•  champions empowerment and supports others;
•  supports and integrates those who may seem ineffectual and unable to cope with 

their responsibilities or situations;
•  makes one evaluate the impact of a coaching intervention;
•  makes one continue the research on integrating coaching within the healthcare 

leadership development system;

professional competence:

•  develops coaching skills;
•  maintains continuous professional development (CPd);
•  is an agent of change and helps others to go through the transition process.

Case Study 3: E-Coaching: A Transatlantic  
Coaching Pilot Project

This was a transatlantic coaching pilot project that was set up to offer one-to-one 
coaching sessions via email and telephone for the leadership students at Rice University, 
Houston, Texas, from members of the Association for Coaching (AC) in the UK 
(Bresser, 2006a and 2006b). The project was monitored and evaluated by four  regular 
questionnaires – both before and after the evaluation.

Aims and objectives

Apart from satisfying the organizational objectives of the hosts, the project aimed to 
match the goals of both coaches and coachees, so that the students being coached could:

•  intensify or support their learning experience at Rice University;
•  leverage their maximum potential with regard to personal development and/or 

leadership issues;
•  develop an active, responsible and self-managed role, to facilitate their personal 

development and their leadership skills;
•  be inspired by the international dimension of the coaching programme;
•  widen their horizon and become sensitive to their own cultural and individual 

characteristic features.

As part of an international coaching team, the coaches participating in the programme 
would also benefit from:

•  learning and gaining experience in e-coaching across cultures;
•  having the challenge (or pleasure) to work with high potential.



 Case Studies 187

From the organizational perspectives, it was hoped that, through the coaching 
programme, Rice University would:

•  improve its overall organizational performance by optimizing students’ learning 
through coaching;

•  become more familiar with coaching as a modern tool for the leveraging of human 
potential and make use of it in the context of the university.

The Association for Coaching could benefit:

•  by getting new perceptions in the area of coaching research;
•  as a result of an increase in the popularity of coaching and in the general public’s 

knowledge about it;
•  by supporting its members to be part of a leading-edge, highly prestigious interna-

tional coaching pilot project, and thereby to gain popularity for the organization.

of course, the coordinator, Frank Bresser, would be able to conduct his coaching research 
on the basis of the international dimension of the project. His research aimed to:

•  analyse the efficiency of external coaches;
•  evaluate the impact of culture on coaching;
•  analyse an organization’s possibilities to increase its overall performance;
•  analyse the necessary preconditions to install a successful coaching system;
•  evaluate the effectiveness/efficiency of telephone and internet coaching;
•  develop a concept for implementing coaching successfully.

As this was a research project, it was agreed that the pilot was to be conducted free of 
charge. only the telephone costs for the coaching sessions were to be paid by Rice 
University. Rice University and the students agreed in return that the pilot project and 
the research findings deriving from it could be used in the research and that publica-
tions would be accessible to the public. Confidentiality and anonymity were ensured 
for the students being coached.

The Process

The scope of the coaching content was defined in advance: it was to be related to the 
personal development and/or leadership issues of the student. The coaching aimed to 
enhance the learning outcomes of the leadership studies. it was up to the students to 
take the initiative to contact their allocated coaches by email or phone to arrange the 
dates of the coaching sessions. each student was given a coaching ‘budget’ of 12 
hours maximum over a 12-week period. With this time frame, it was up to the coaches 
and coachees to agree among themselves on the regularity, duration and dates/times 
of the coaching sessions. Coaches and coachees were also given information on using 
free internet phoning software (Skype) for those who preferred internet access.

initially it was planned to offer eight places for the students. At the end, owing to 
the demand, 19 coaches and coachees were paired up. As part of the AC complaints 
procedure, coachees were informed that any complaints could be made to the AC 



188 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

board via their student coordinator (US) and via the UK coordinator of the 
programme. The coachees had full control of both the process and the evaluation of 
coaching at all times. As i remember, Frank Bresser was always saying, ‘the coachee is 
always the “king” of the coaching process’.

Selection
The coaches selected to participate in the programme were members of the AC with 
appropriate qualifications. At the start of the programme, the coordinator sent a task 
profile to all the potential candidates (AC members) via the AC email system. The 
‘best’ (the top 20) coaches from the applications were selected. The author was one 
of the members selected on the list. Before the confirmation, the list of the selected 
coaches (including their qualification profiles) was sent to the student coordinator 
(Susan Lieberman) for the students to select their preferred coaches.

Evaluation
rEsults from thE E-quEstionnairE
The results of the evaluation from the transatlantic coaching pilot project were most 
encouraging. All the coachees who responded to the questionnaires (84 per cent 
response rate) said that they would like the pilot to continue and reported that

•  the coaching programme had added value to their leadership studies;
•  the coaching was different from other experiences available to them.

The majority of coachees indicated increased self-awareness and reflection as value 
added to their leadership studies (>40 per cent). What made coaching different from 
other experiences was that

•  the coaching was fully personalized and focused;
•  it provided an independent, objective setting for developing one’s thought;
•  it was an interesting way to step out of the box and get wider perspectives;
•  coaches were trained professionals with a lot of expertise, experience and knowledge 

to share.

The coachees especially liked the coaching experience because

•  it was tailor-made and personally focused;
•  the coaches were great;
•  it had diverse viewpoints.

The results also showed that external coaches, especially from other cultures or 
geographical locations, were highly appreciated by the coachees. The latter said that 
having external coaches was very beneficial to the whole process, in particular in terms 
of bringing new perspectives and ensuring confidentiality. it provided a virtual space 
where the coachees felt ‘safer’.

The coaches who participated in the pilot project also reported that they had 
benefited from the experience in the following ways:



 Case Studies 189

•  by coaching internationally and cross-culturally;
•  by coaching persons with high potentials;
•  by having different viewpoints presented to them.

A significant number of coachees preferred face-to-face coaching. Most coachees 
found phone cards more difficult to use than internet phone (80 per cent reported 
difficulties with the cards, against 20 per cent with the internet). According to the 
feedback from the coachees, the e-coaching programme could be improved in the 
following major aspects:

•  by having the coaching sessions run during term time (rather than between two 
academic years);

•  by providing help in scheduling to manage different time zones;
•  by offering more guidance at the beginning of the project.

overall, all the respondents (excluding the 24 per cent ‘don’t know’) rated the coach-
ing programme as ‘very good’ or ‘good’. The majority of coachees (66 per cent) 
believed that having a permanent coaching programme would increase the attractive-
ness of the university as a place to study.

onE yEar on
one year after the transatlantic coaching pilot project finished, the coaches on the 
project formed a network and were still keeping in touch over the internet, via email 
and other ways of communicating. We assessed the legacy of the pilot and its impact 
upon the coachees and upon Rice University. it was a pleasant surprise that we still 
received very positive feedback from some of our coachees. For example, one of the 
coaches reported (this comes from the feedback survey):

Coaching in some form has remained [in Rice University]. A year on and Rice is exploring 
the possibility of co-coaching for students. My coachee has been inspired to explore training 
in coaching for himself, as an important aspect of his future work. He told me fellow stu-
dents were grateful to have had this experience, one they could not have afforded finan-
cially otherwise. He stressed how good it was for them to have this opportunity at a young 
age. His eyes were opened to another way of working with people and he continues to both 
develop and share his learning. A year on and the impact is still being felt; the young stu-
dents have taken the gift we gave them and utilized it in their own leadership work.

Case Study 4: Narrative Coaching in Communities

As described in Chapter 3, narrative coaching is adopted from Michael White’s 
therapeutic applications, which were originally drawn from Vygotsky’s idea of social 
learning and from the work of Barbara Myerhoff (1982, 1986) – a cultural 
anthropologist who developed the definitional ceremony metaphor. The metaphor 
was applied to develop a community network as part of the coaching and mentoring 
programme in the UK. other developments of narrative coaching include Stelter 
(2007) in denmark and drake (2006, 2007) in Australia and the US.



190 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

i chose to adopt narrative coaching because i discovered that clients who migrated 
to live and work in another country find this approach most helpful. The typical prob-
lems for clients who suffered from a dislocation of place, and hence of culture, include 
taking for granted their own signature strength, values and beliefs. The goals of the 
approach in this case were to develop the coachees’ skills and knowledge by re-author-
ing the stories of their life experience.

Aims and objectives: the vision

The vision was to create

[a] network of highly inspirational, skilful, talented leaders from diverse communities 
who come together to empower each other, thereby making each other even more inspi-
rational, skilful, talented; and the communities become sustainable and more vibrant. 
(Law, Aga and Hill, 2006)

The aim was to create a community network that empowers all the members within 
the network, who in turn empower the diverse communities.
 The objective of the conference was that, by the end of it, delegates would

•  understand the nature of the community network and their role in the network 
and in the communities;

•  form a foundation to proceed to the next phase;
•  create a list of volunteers (with contact points) to sign up to be champions of the 

community network;
•  consider developing a social contract.

The first step was to develop the skills of the members of the network so that they may 
become leaders and

•  lead the leaders;
•  train the trainers;
•  coach the coaches;
•  mentor the mentors.

it was hoped that all this would create a domino effect. during the initial session in the 
community network development, the delegates were coached in using facilitation 
skills. during the second session of the programme, the participants were introduced to 
the concepts of coaching, mentoring and the psychology that underpins their practice, 
including key definitions and a wide range of coaching and mentoring techniques.

The process: the definitional ceremony

The conference was held on a Saturday, to ensure that participants from various com-
munities could attend. over 40 people from the mixed community of Peterborough 
attended. The conference celebrated the successful completion of the Positive image 
project.



 Case Studies 191

Applying narrative coaching to diverse communities is particularly challenging. 
Snowy Aga described the characteristics of a diverse community as follows:

it sounds like a hundred drummers with different drums, each beating their [sic] own 
rhythm. it sounds like the cacophony of a hundred tribes, each speaking their [sic] own 
tongue. it sounds like a hundred calls for the same purpose.

The campfire
As an introduction to facilitate the definitional ceremony, a story was retold that had 
been acquired from the international narrative Therapy Festive Conference, Adelaide, 
Australia (Combrink, Maree and Mabolo, 2006). The story went:

in Karos and Kambro, drama, dance, stories, mime, creative writing and sharing life stories 
around the camp fire were all woven into an intricate pattern of hopes and dreams:

Around the campfire,
They sang and danced
it’s freedom from all things.
Because children could talk freely
About the good moments
All the good things in life
They’re able to know…

The storyteller then took out a stick, passed it round the group and asked them to try to 
break it. one man broke it in two with ease. The storyteller then presented a bundle of 
sticks and asked the group to break it. The bundle was passed round, and some tried to 
break it with their hands and others across their knees. one by one each member of the 
group tried and failed. The storyteller pointed out that the bundle of sticks was a meta-
phor, the point of which was:

To be alone, we are weak.
Together we are strong.
Social collaboration is our strength.

From an outsider witness perspective, this story had a particular resonance for me, as 
a similar story had been told in China down the centuries. At the conference, a chop-
stick was passed round and the audience was asked to try to break it. The first partici-
pant broke the chopstick without any effort. Then a bundle of chopsticks was brought 
out, and no one could break it. The story was unchanged – its essence was the same.

A facilitative workshop was then carried out to redevelop the participants’ skills and 
knowledge by using the narrative approach. This was based on the principle of 
 re-authoring the stories of their life experience (as described in the earlier chapters).

each group was asked to contribute a volunteer storyteller and a volunteer inter-
viewer. The storytellers were asked to recall a skill or a form of knowledge they had 
recently acquired and to talk to the interviewer about it. The others acted as outsider 
witnesses. each outsider witness group was asked to have at least one volunteer to 
perform the retelling later, at the plenary session.



192 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

The theme of the exercise asked the participants to produce:

•  a list of skills and knowledge that are relevant for a community network;
•  a list of values that are relevant for a social contract;
•  a list of actions to proceed to the next phase;
•  a list (with contact points) of volunteers for signing up to be champions of the 

community network, who would take the above actions forward.

The audience in the plenary session became the largest outsider witness group and 
acted as a community for witnessing and honouring the retelling and the retelling of 
retelling the various stories. The outcome of the group discussion was both enlight-
ening and empowering.

thE story of linE dancing
At the feedback session, Group 1’s spokesperson (an outsider witness) retold the story 
of someone’s experience in learning line dancing. Another outsider witness in the 
group described how listening to that story made her feel like joining the storyteller’s 
line dancing class. When, having listened to the retelling of her own story, she was 
asked how that retelling resonated with her own values, hopes and dreams, the story-
teller reported a sense of reassurance about her own values and the learning of new 
skills – for example, another language. one participant from another group pointed 
out the link between food, music and dance. As universal values, they had the poten-
tial to engage and communicate across cultures.

thE youngEst lEadEr
it was very moving that an 8-year-old girl had the confidence to be the storyteller 
in Group 2. She told us about her experience of learning to speak english. She 
reported that when she and her family first arrived in england she could not speak 
a word of english. Two years later it was very encouraging to hear her addressing 
the audience in english. interestingly, once she started, her younger brother joined 
in, speaking about his experience too. His resonance was transported into the 
courage to speak.

thE story of thE futurE group
The outsider witness in Group 3 introduced the storyteller, who had lived in england 
for 16 years. This storyteller also spoke about his experience of learning to speak 
english – in his case, by talking to english people. one of his hopes and dreams for 
the future was to set up a group to help people from different cultures to learn english. 
This could act as a means to unify different cultures, he said, and to discover ‘the truth 
to be human’.

‘thE risE and fall of a yorkshirE pudding’
The Group 4 spokesperson titled the story of their group ‘The rise and fall of a 
Yorkshire Pudding’. (A Yorkshire pudding is made from a flour and milk batter. it 
used to be popular in england as an accompaniment to roast beef in the tradi-
tional Sunday lunch.) The story described how a woman learnt to make Yorkshire 
puddings as a young wife and mother. initially it did not work – the Yorkshire 



 Case Studies 193

pudding collapsed rather than rising, as it should have. She interpreted this as a 
failure to perform her role (of mother and wife?). in the end, she learned that it 
really did not matter whether the Yorkshire pudding was flat or not as long as she 
had done her best. (This has a resonance with Csikszentmihalyi’s (1991) concept 
of optimal experience – the flow.) The story demonstrated that something as 
simple as cooking could review one’s value, role and identity. When listening to 
her story being retold by the outsider witness, the storyteller felt that the story 
confirmed her sense of self and her identity and value. it gave her a sense of pride. 
She would like to take further action to go out and talk and listen to more peo-
ple’s stories. (i later received the feedback that the story was actually told from a 
feminist perspective. This threw light on the hidden thread of the storyline. Viewed 
from the angle of feminist discourse, it might suggest that the original storyteller was 
trying to express the inequality of gender in society; power relationships operate not 
just in the workplace, but also at home, as an expression of society’s wider cultural 
expectations.)

thE story of disillusionmEnt
not all stories were positive. As the conference members came from diverse commu-
nities, some of them had suffered discrimination and social alienation. The spokes-
person in Group 5 described the storyteller, whose family originally came from the 
Caribbean: she was a fourth-generation child born in Britain. She (the spokesperson) 
depicted her story (the storyteller’s) as ‘a long struggle to mainstream equality and a 
feeling of disillusionment’. She described many skills and ideas the storyteller had to 
help people suffering from drug abuse and withdrawal symptoms, such as setting up 
a drug abuse centre, volunteer groups, and so on. However, she felt that over the last 
22 years the storyteller had remained on the margins, received very little or no help 
and was not in the ‘mainstream’. She said that listening to the story from Group 3 
about the hopes and dreams to set up a group to help others break down cultural bar-
riers resonated with her own past struggle. She did not want them to experience dis-
illusionment, as she had. The discussion quickly evolved into a political debate about 
what the government and local authorities should do. This is a good example of the 
risk of following a negative story line. This requires re-centring by the facilitator, who 
has to bring it to the central theme. At the same time, the facilitator may highlight the 
positive strength (such as resilience) that the storyteller showed in the story (22 years 
of continuous struggle at the margins of society demonstrate a lot of resilience and 
determination). The art is for a narrative coach to help the person to re-author the 
story so that it may lead to a more positive conclusion – a new outcome and action. 
For example, you may ask the coachee to re-imagine how life would be if she could 
re-direct her positive strength to other avenues.

thE story of icE skating and icE hockEy
The outsider witness retold how the storyteller learned to skate on ice and as a result 
injured her back. However, she did not give up. instead of ice-skating, she learnt a 
new skill and found a new hobby: ice hockey. The retelling of this story gave the 
 storyteller a sense of pride and self-esteem. it confirmed her value – the courage to 
take action to ‘get out of one’s own comfort zone’. This story also resonates with 
many that i heard during the 2012 Paralympic Games.



194 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

landscapE of consciousnEss mapping and landscapE of action
To summarize, the resonance created through listening to the retelling of the par-
ticipants’ own stories generated the following emotions or values (landscape of 
 consciousness) and actions (landscape of actions):

landscape of consciousness:

•  a sense of pride;
•  respect;
•  reassurance;
•  the realization of one’s self and new skills;
•  a sense of self-achievement;
•  a realization of past sacrifices;
•  self-awareness;
•  self-realization;
•  moral considerations;
•  happy memories;
•  a sense of trust;
•  a sense of responsibility;
•  courage;
•  motivation;
•  commitment;

landscape of action – an impulse to:

•  communicate;
•  get involved with others;
•  break barriers;
•  make decisions;
•  make stronger commitments;
•  overcome hostility;
•  overcome prejudice;
•  translate theory into action;
•  take positive actions.

action plan
From the conference, the groups generated a number of concrete actions:

1 to join the community network;
2 to be part of this community;
3 to be involved (don’t just ‘talk’, but also take ‘action’);
4 to share and participate at all levels;
5 to create and foster opportunities for the involvement of others, especially the 

diverse minority groups;
6 to discuss and take forward the ideas of ‘campfire’ and storytelling in the group 

members’ organizations;



 Case Studies 195

7 to ensure that contact details and interests were shared;
8 to ask the question, ‘What can we bring to the party?’
9 to get involved with networking opportunities;

10 to help the community network to regenerate deprived areas.

evaluation: Follow-Up Feedback

The conference report was published in a form of newsletter called The Cutting Edge 
and was disseminated to all the participants, stakeholders and wider communities in 
the form of an e-journal (Law, Aga and Hill, 2006). Some of the feedback in emails i 
received from readers was encouraging:

i was very inspired to read about how you have … created ways to share your learning to 
further community development. Your passion and commitment to your dreams in this 
area is very evident! it sounds like it worked fantastically well, and was very creative!

What stood out to me, was the expansiveness with which you brought such a diversity 
of people and projects together, to empower them to be able to use the knowledge you 
gained from narrative training. [The] story gave me the image of you drawing together 
many different people – of diverse ages and cultures, ideas and resources to create 
 communities – in a way that involved lots of noise, movement, laughter, and maybe mess! 
one thing that resonated with me was the care you seemed to have taken to ensure that 
children and older peoples voices were heard (i leaned this from the retelling and photos), 
as the inclusion of generations in any community development seems very important 
to me. Your “telling” has got me thinking how i might include the voices of older and 
younger people in the lives of the adult women i work with, who have often become very 
isolated as a result of abuse. So good on you!!

outcome

it was a pleasant surprise to see the idea of telling stories around the campfire in Karos 
and Kambro having caught the community’s imagination. A participant at the story 
retelling session asked: ‘Where is the campfire in Peterborough?’ Many others were 
inspired to create a campfire in their own communities. As part of the outcome, a new 
community network was set up.

difficultiEs EncountErEd
difficulties include:

•  The validity, reliability and representation of the primary authors who told the 
stories. As a narrative practitioner playing the ethnographer’s role of retelling, 
reporting and disseminating the stories of individuals and groups from the diverse 
communities, we had an ethical dilemma: had we done justice to those people, 
honouring and respecting them? Some of the stories were very personal and 
politically sensitive. Questions raised include: Are the retold stories a fair represen-
tation of the intention of the storytellers? Are the retold stories valid, and do they 
represent the meaning of the original stories reliably?

•  Acknowledgements to the stakeholders. in order to maintain confidentiality, 
we  kept the names and identities of the storytellers anonymous. As a result, 



196 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

 acknowledgements to those individuals by way of honouring the source of the 
stories became difficult to make.

•  our responsibility as coaches, consultants and researchers in disseminating those 
stories. on the one hand, like academic researchers, we felt that we had a 
professional duty to publish those stories, to share those skills and knowledge 
among our colleagues. on the other hand, this had to balance with the sensitiv-
ities of those individuals who contributed to those stories and knowledge.

•  ownership of the stories. Some of the stories were highly idiosyncratic and personal, 
yet, once they were told and retold at the conference and published, they were in 
the public domain; skills and knowledge were shared among communities. While 
some may be very happy with the dissemination of the stories, which embedded 
and transported the knowledge, others may feel that the stories were too private to 
share in a wider circle. This raises the question of ownership and authorship of 
those stories. do those who write and report the stories own them, or should the 
storytellers own their own stories? Who has the power, responsibility and control 
to disseminate the stories and the knowledge, and for whose benefit?

•  Rules and regulations. owing to the rules and regulations of the organization, 
setting up a fire at a nature reserve was judged by the management to be highly 
undesirable. So at the end we had to use a metaphor, lighting up a candle and 
setting up a marquee instead of creating a real fire.

•  The weather. Setting up a campfire and telling stories outdoors in england turned 
out to be very challenging. even though the follow-up event was to be held in the 
summer, during the hottest week of the year, it had to be cancelled at the last 
minute due to a thunderstorm!

Case Study 5: Coaching in Communities:  
Community Coaching Café

The final case study addresses the role of the coordinator in leading and supporting 
the UiF/iLS approach in practice. it considers the experience and reflection of a 
coordinator and this person’s role in working in the local community setting. The 
project was called Community Coaching Café (CCC). it was situated in St neots, a 
satellite market town for London and Cambridge that is outside the high-growth, 
high-tech purview of Cambridge University. it was part of the activities carried out by 
enterprise Pathways (eP), a social enterprise set up in 2010 as a registered community 
interest company. it had no shareholders and its profits were reinvested for the benefit 
of the community.

eP developed the CCC as a project in 2010 to provide an accessible, non- 
stigmatizing and safe environment for the neighbourhood and offered free, 
independent, confidential, face-to-face peer support, coaching and mentoring  services. 
The need for the project arose from an earlier action research project involving young 
people, which explored the impact of violence on their lives and the idea that a 
community drop-in with mentors would be valuable to young people and their 
 parents. CCC was run by local volunteers and aimed to support local people who 
needed someone to talk to. it provided community coaching for volunteers. it was a 



 Case Studies 197

standalone community service for people to self-refer to; this service could also evolve 
into contingency support for users of other organizations, many of whom were 
ex periencing cuts to their services at that time.

Aims and objectives

The project aimed to disseminate the collective experience of the managing staff and 
volunteers among individuals from local groups by using coaching and mentoring. 
Many of the participants were community leaders and entrepreneurs of small and 
medium-sized enterprises. This also created a community resource for the volunteers.

The process

initially, 12 people trained as the first community coaches. Most of these coaches were 
already active members of the community, helping in other capacities, including as 
leader of the town council, mayor, local teachers and health workers. The first partici-
pants were community-orientated active residents such as charity workers, town coun-
cillors, youth workers, helpline advisers. The later intake divided approximately 
equally between counselling or social work students seeking placements and unem-
ployed or retired people wishing to share their skills and experience to help others. 
Seventy-five per cent were females, 60 per cent were aged over 50, 85 per cent were 
ethnically white UK residents, 5 per cent were South American, 10 percent were black 
or of a mixed race, and 12 per cent had a disability.

All volunteers were Criminal Records Bureau (CRB) cleared and offered an 
 accredited two-day introductory course (10 hours). This is an intensive coaching and 
mentoring programme covering a range of techniques in addition to basic coaching 
and counselling principles:

•  confidentiality;
•  empathy;
•  active listening;
•  assumptions;
•  barriers;
•  boundaries;
•  self-disclosure;
•  endings.

The training was followed by ongoing group supervisions; these included a number 
of practical sessions with experienced coaches from the team and reflective journal 
keeping as part of the coachees’ personal development. For instance, each new coachee 
performed both as a café listener and as a community coachee, in order to gain insights 
into the coaching experience from opposing perspectives. Although these practical 
sessions were called rehearsals, they were valuable experiences in their own right, as 
they provided new coaches with a safe place where they could recognize and respond 
to any emotions arising from the coaching process. They could also learn to dissociate 
themselves from their coachees’ circumstances; gain personal insights into how they 
would protect themselves emotionally and practically once they became known in the 



198 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

community as coaches; begin their actual coaching practice; and start honing their 
own coaching style.

on completion of the course, volunteers were asked if they would like to join the 
Community Café coaching team and/or be helped to find a placement elsewhere. each 
trained volunteer (coach-to-be) completed a volunteer profile outlining what experience 
she or he would bring to and what she or he wanted to gain from the coaching experi-
ence. Coach and coachee were matched for suitability before the coaching commenced. 
informal meetings that covered non-confidential matters were arranged in everyday social 
spaces such as coffee shops, bars or even the local park, where that was appropriate.

each session took about an hour. All coaching sessions were coachee-led. The 
session aims and objectives were noted at the outset. The coach began by positioning 
the coachee and the situation in the present, to achieve a state of mindfulness by 
focusing on the coachee’s cognitive and emotional states and aspirations at that time. 
The coaches maintained this state through rapport building, exploring boundary 
setting particularly in relation to any others who might be involved in resolving the 
situation, and encouraging the coachees to trust their intuition and be aware of their 
impact on others. They would clarify aims and reframe negative responses in a positive 
way, by prompting ‘what ifs’ to discover further options and the names of any obsta-
cles likely to occur. in this way a simple action plan was drawn up. When the session 
was drawing to a close, coaches checked whether its aims had been properly discussed; 
if they had not, they would prompt answers about what was lacking. The action plan 
was then reviewed, the session was summarized and agreed upon, an evaluation form 
completed, and the session ended. All coaching sessions were recorded, evaluated and 
stored confidentially, and both coach and coachee received ‘debriefings’. Coaches and 
coachees would reflect on the attitude and helpfulness of the coach, the suitability of 
the location, how and whether the session helped to achieve the goal and resolve the 
issues, whether the aim of the session had been met, and whether the coachee would 
like further sessions. Where appropriate, a referral to other service providers might be 
offered. issues arising from the session were discussed in supervision sessions, and 
they provided feedback for future coaching training.

each group supervision focused on issues actually or typically arising in inter-
ventions: one third focused on elements of professional self-management (session 
closure, self-disclosure, paraphrasing); one third on emotional intelligence (how to 
prompt effectively, barriers to rapport building, boundary setting, learning to disso-
ciate); and one third on teaching (note-taking skills, session evaluations, reflective 
journaling).

in this way more than 20 volunteers were developed as community coaches. They 
were provided with training, supervision, tools for self-development, and placement 
opportunities. They formed strong social bonds through training together; these 
were valuable to all, especially to those who were new to the community.

evaluation

The CCC project was evaluated in terms of two aspects:

•  the community’s awareness of the project;
•  stakeholder satisfaction (coachees, coachees, directors, funders)



 Case Studies 199

Community awareness
initial awareness-raising campaigns included posting flyers to doctors’ surgeries, 
hairdressers, cafés and pubs. These attracted no enquiries from the community. A 
 two-pronged, long-term marketing plan was developed to reach healthcare 
 professionals – particularly general practitioners and mental health workers – and 
the local groups. By getting involved in healthcare forums, participants created 
opportunities to talk about how their coaching and mentoring services could be 
both a support to the community and a supplement to their out-of-hours provi-
sion. Using the local press – particularly for the launch, the training events and the 
workshop days, when the local online community newspaper gave the project free 
listings and the local radio station gave the coordinator airtime to talk about the 
project – also raised community awareness. These activities increased the number 
of inquiries.

Stakeholder satisfaction
After six months, the viability of the project was measured by using UiF/iLS to 
examine the group reflection from the following perspectives:

•  self: the participants (directors, volunteer coaches and inquirers, coachees);
•  social/culture: the wider community;
•  the organization/culture: the company and the funders.

The evaluation drew on users’ feedback, publicity outcomes and turnout at events; 
other comments from other organizations evaluated the strength of the relationships 
and recommended the creation of a SWoT matrix to highlight strengths and oppor-
tunities, weaknesses and threats. The results showed that those people who used the 
coaching service found it valuable, but the percentage of community members taking 
up the service remained low. The funders were satisfied with the project aims and its 
achievements to the extent that further grants and donations were offered.

Reflection

The learning points from this pilot coaching project have been many. The community 
engagement targets have been met in various ways:

•  by strengthening other community services through the provision of volunteers 
for a local foyer, a young offenders’ unit, a helpline service;

•  by providing learning opportunities for the wider community by way of work-
shops, talks and drop-in groups;

•  by building mutually beneficial referral relationships with other volunteer-led 
organizations where coaching skills are valued at a premium, thus increasing the 
mentoring capacity within the community.

The learning environment for the community coaches
We could see from this case study that the practice of community coaching satisfies 
different needs of diverse individuals:



200 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  those seeking specific advice, whose issues could be resolved through factual 
information or by being signposted elsewhere;

•  those prepared to talk through their situation and their ideas of how to resolve the 
issues, and willing to do so with an impartial coach, skilled in prompting reflective 
thinking;

•  dependent people with complicated, multiple, maybe overwhelming, maybe cyclic 
or recurrent challenges about which they have become paralysed – people likely to 
require ongoing support;

•  isolated and lonely people, for whom the social contact was enough in itself.

Through the process, volunteers were able to gain entry to a social care placement. 
This improved their skills, built their self-confidence, and enriched the experience of 
the community.

Reflecting on personal development
on reflection, the coordinator realized how much she enjoyed the experiential 
learning, the process of converting ideas into actions for herself and others, and par-
ticularly the shared learning experience gained from the group supervisions and, more 
widely, from the coaching psychology peer support group in the region.

developing and running this project demanded boldness, persistence, effective net-
working, backroom skills, and a belief in community mentoring. Reflecting on the 
experience, the coordinator felt that the early days were exhilarating, as she tapped into 
the energies of local people and the project gathered a momentum of its own, offering 
interesting options for development. The backroom work was demanding, but it cre-
ated a satisfying core, which shaped governance and the training resources. The out-
ward-facing aspects – giving talks, talking to the press, the market day launch – were the 
icing on the cake, creating new energy and new opportunities that became integrated 
into the practice.

Looking ahead
Given the groundswell of support that the project received from different sections of 
the community, the stakeholders were encouraged to consolidate their experience, 
and they plan to do the following:

•  share the learning with the professional communities and the wider community;
•  source funds to develop the community coaching pilot as an out-of-hours 

well-being service in support of general healthcare services;
•  develop a volunteer management consultancy for the third sector.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

Having read this chapter, i hope you have learnt from it how to take coaching and 
mentoring beyond the micro-level experience of one-to-one relationships. The case 
studies have addressed some of the collective and strategic issues that inform the 
establishment of sustainable coaching and mentoring systems. The process needs to 



 Case Studies 201

embody the flexibility and informality required to make learning happen at the micro-
level of experience, but also to ensure that an infrastructure is in place to support its 
continuity. At the micro-level of experience, perhaps coaching and mentoring are 
practised as an art form. At the level of strategy and system development, it has to 
become more scientific and systematic. Coaching and mentoring cannot stay still. 
They have to be capable of growing and expanding to take root.

Carl Jung (1875–1961) once said: ‘Until you make the unconscious conscious, 
it will direct your life and you will call it fate’ (quoted in Potter, 2012: 108). i hope that, 
having read the case studies, you will see that the coaching/mentoring process is a 
transformation from unconscious to conscious – whether through CBT, through story-
telling or through self-reflection. in all these cases coaches and mentors performed 
multiple roles: sometimes as leaders who inspired participants; other times as facilita-
tors, or simply as participants who took a back seat (or a de-centred position); and yet 
other times as thinkers and writers who reflected on the lessons learnt. Throughout 
these different engagements, coaches and mentors use themselves as a vehicle for 
change (in terms of gestalt philosophy). We have observed and experienced that 
coaches and mentors seem to share a common attitude, posture and values, although 
their forms of expression, terminology, styles and techniques may vary depending on 
clients, contexts and cultures. A competent coach or mentor seems to be able to bring 
the process alive by holding on to this core common passion and yet be equipped with 
a diverse experience, techniques, skills and knowledge for even more diverse applica-
tions. That calls for a systematic, scientific approach to learning and to the evaluation 
of the intervention – as well as practising it creatively.

i shall discuss this matter further in Chapters 10 and 11.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

evaluation

Introduction

The literature on coaching tends to illustrate different techniques or psychological 
approaches. There is a need for an evidence-based evaluation of the effectiveness of 
coaching. This chapter advocates the impact of assessment as a methodology used in 
the evaluation of the effectiveness of a coaching programme. The key question is: 
How will you realize the benefits? The chapter provides a detailed evaluation of the 
theories, tools and techniques of coaching. it also provides an evaluation frame-
work, its implementation process, and the results in terms of the outcome and 
impact.

The generic evaluation methodology described in the first section can be used to 
assist evaluators and managers in the development of plans for evaluating and moni-
toring coaching and mentoring programmes. it sets out the core elements that should 
be covered in an evaluation plan. From an organizational perspective, an evaluation 
plan can be established before the implementation of a coaching and mentoring 
programme.

evaluation is an important part of the business process; it is designed to improve 
the success of coaching and mentoring programmes in achieving organizational 
 objectives, to assist resource allocation and to provide accountability.

Evaluation Methodology

This section offers a detailed description of the evaluation methodology, together 
with the results of the initial coaching and mentoring programme. it is based on 20 
years of experience in research and evaluation. The impact evaluation methodology 
was developed on the basis of work carried out on a large-scale evaluation of the 

10



204 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Home office’s £30 million Safer Cities Programme (see ekblom, Law and Sutton, 
1996). This is now regarded as the standard for best practice.

The evaluation methodology is also consistent with the RoAMeF framework, in 
accordance with the Treasury’s Green Book guidance (HMSo, 1997). As the acronym 
indicates, the RoAMeF framework has the following components:

1 rationale;
2 objectives;
3 appraisal;
4 monitoring;
5 evaluation;
6 feedback.

The framework can be embedded in the reflective learning wheel (Chapter 3), which 
yields an integrated RoAMeF framework (Figure 10.1):

Step 1: rationale

The first step is to carry out an overview of the programme in order to ensure that two 
prerequisites are met:

1  needs: the needs of individual coaches, as well as the needs of the organization as 
a whole. These needs must be clearly identified by the person who proposes the 
programme, be that the coach, the coachee or the project manager.

4. Monitoring      Data from external source

4b. Analysis

1. Rationale:
Abstract Conception

3b. Implementation  

External 
transformation: 
towards
behaviour

Internal 
transformation: 
consciousness
emerges

4a. Cognition and emotion

5. Evaluation

2. Objectives (in
Action Plan)

3a. Appraisal

6. Feedback

Figure 10.1 integrated RoAMeF framework (adapted from http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/ 
d/green_book_complete.pdf)

http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/green_book_complete.pdf
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/green_book_complete.pdf


 Evaluation 205

2  Benefit: the benefit of any proposed coaching initiative is likely to outweigh the 
cost of the programme itself.

The above overview should include both pros and cons. on the side of the cons, there 
are two negative perspectives:

1  negative consequences: List any negative consequences of the coaching 
programme. Would there be any adverse effect to the organization as a result of 
the coaching programme? For example, what if the coachees leave the organiza-
tion after the coaching sessions?

2  The ‘do nothing’ option: What would be the consequence of not intervening with 
coaching?

For a coaching programme to take place within an organization, the benefits of the 
programme must outweigh all the risks that may surface from these negative perspec-
tives. The research involved to answer the above questions would provide scope as 
well as a rationale for the coaching and mentoring programme.

Step 2: objectives

The second step is to set out clearly the objectives of the proposed coaching programme 
and its desired outcomes. The objectives should state with precision what the coach-
ing programme is intended to achieve. There may be a hierarchy of outcomes,  outputs 
and targets that will have been identified during the introduction of the programme. 
The outcomes are the eventual benefits to the organization, coachees or whoever 
funded the programme. The outputs are the deliverables – for example, the number 
of coaching activities that can be clearly stated or measured.

objectives can be expressed in terms of desired outcomes. However, some  outcomes 
may not be quantifiable – for example, increased job satisfaction, motivation, social 
capital and aspirations. in such cases one can specify outputs as intermediate steps and 
link them to an indirect outcome – for instance, an increase in productivity and a 
decrease in absenteeism. it is important to demonstrate how the output and the 
desired outcomes relate to each other.

in a hypothetical coaching programme assumed to be diverse, the overall objective 
may be described thus:

To address the major gap in leadership and equality within in the Region’s Health Services 
by introducing a coaching and mentoring programme so that the senior professional com-
position reflects the number of diverse employees who have demonstrated their professional 
competence.

The targets set according to the described outputs and desired outcomes may include:

•  an optimal level of performance;
•  human capital;
•  social capital;
•  the number of coaching places that will be provided by the end of the programme 

(with a specific date);



206 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  higher productivity for both coachees and mentees;
•  proportion of the workforce with the required professional competence;
•  reduction in the percentage of the dropout rate.

Step 3a: appraisal

From the executive’s perspective, the most significant part of the business process is an 
appraisal of the coaching proposal. There may be many options (apart from the coaching 
programme) to be reviewed in order to meet the objectives that have been identified. This 
review provides the parameters of an appropriate solution for the needs of the organiza-
tion as well as for the individual stakeholders. A manageable number of proposed options 
can then be shortlisted. The ‘do minimum’ option should always be included as a baseline 
against which to assess alternative interventions, such as coaching or mentoring.

From the outset, executives who own the budget for the coaching and mentoring 
programme give an appraisal of whether the programme is approved or not. The 
decision making includes an assessment of whether the proposal is beneficial to the 
organization as well as to the coachees and mentees. The assessment is done by project 
managers or by the coaches and mentors who have been recruited for the programme. 
The conclusions and recommendations are clearly communicated to all stakeholders.

The essential technique of assessment is to evaluate the available options, whereby the 
coaching programme is validated, objectives are set and options are created and reviewed 
by analysing their costs and benefits. Within this framework, cost–benefit analysis (CBA) 
is recommended – as contrasted with cost-effectiveness analysis (CeA) – with supplementary 
techniques to be used for weighing up any costs and benefits that remain unvalued.

The process of appraising a coaching proposal is iterative – that is, it is repeated a 
number of times before the best option is selected. This is sometimes referred to as a 
sensitivity analysis, where the question ‘What if...?’ is raised in the decision-making 
process. For example, ‘What if option A is £x cheaper, or option B can yield £y of 
benefit after five years instead of two?’ Thus CBA and CeA techniques may also be 
repeated. The RoAMeF cycle may not always be followed sequentially. it is recom-
mended that the evaluator review the impact of risks, uncertainties and inherent biases 
more than once. This prevents spurious accuracy and provides a ‘good value for 
money’ guarantee despite changing circumstances.

Cost–benefit analysis (CBA)
At the appraisal stage the coaching pro gramme evaluator needs to quantify the bene-
fits that the coaching will bring to the coachees and to the organization, as well as 
the costs that will be incurred. The former may include increases in productivity, while 
the latter may include the consultant’s fee as well as staff time in participating in the 
programme. The former may also include items for which the market does not  provide 
a satisfactory measure of economic value – for example, an increase in job satisfaction 
and in employees’ motivation.

Cost–effectiveness analysis (CEA)
CeA compares the costs of alternative ways of  producing the same or similar benefits. 
For example, could an increase in productivity and performance of the staff be brought 
about through formal training instead of coaching or mentoring?



 Evaluation 207

Step 3b: implementation

Here i have introduced a substep: implementation that follows appraisal within the 
RoAMeF framework to complete our learning cycle. After the best option has been 
selected, it should be translated into action. implementation should include consulta-
tion and involve all the stakeholders; it should also include an impact assessment 
before procurement takes place.

Step 4: Monitoring

Like any successful project management, a coaching programme should be monitored 
to ensure that it progresses according to the plan. This usually involves monthly 
management meetings with key stakeholders – the programme executive, senior 
 suppliers and user representatives. in the coaching programme, it may be useful to ask 
coachees to keep a journal (a reflective log) to describe their coaching experience. 
This enables both coaches and coachees to monitor their development as well as to 
address any barriers or difficulties encountered during the coaching journey.

Step 5: evaluation

evaluation examines the outputs as well as the outcomes of the coaching 
programme against what was expected. it also ensures that the lessons learned are 
fed back into the decision-making process. This ensures that the future coaching 
programme is refined so as to reflect what achieves the objectives and promotes 
the coachees’ and the organization’s interests in the best possible way. For evalu-
ating the effectiveness of a coaching programme, one may find it  useful to refer to 
the established model by Kirkpatrick (1994). The model examines four levels of 
impact:

•  reaction to the programme and planned action;
•  learning;
•  behavioural change;
•  business results such as return on investment (Roi).

Techniques for evaluation are similar to appraisal techniques in terms of how they link 
to the programme objectives – its outputs and outcomes. However, owing to the 
obvious timing of the coaching journey in the learning cycle, at the evaluation stage 
(that is, after the implementation of the coaching programme) one should be able to 
use actual (historical) data rather than estimates from forecasts. The purpose of the eval-
uation is not only to check whether the objectives have been met, but also to learn any 
lessons that may come up, including analyses of surprise. This process will then be com-
municated to all stakeholders and contribute to the future interventions or proposals.

The evaluation typically follows a sequence of steps designed to:

1 establish exactly what is to be evaluated and how past outturns can be measured;
2  set new targets, output and desired outcomes, which would be the result of imple-

menting the coaching and mentoring programme;



208 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

3  compare the outturn with the target outturn and with the outcomes of the coach-
ing and mentoring programme;

4 present the results and recommendations;
5 disseminate and use these results and recommendations.

Key questions in evaluation include:

•  To what extent did the anticipated costs and benefits match the actual outcome? 
in other words, what was the ‘benefits realization’?

•  in the light of experience with the target group of coachees, would better results 
have been achieved if this group had been more tightly defined? For example, if 
the alternative option of focusing purely on minority workers or on new employees 
from different cultures had been chosen?

•  Has any new information about the impact of the coaching programme come to 
light since it was implemented?

•  How effective is the programme in meeting the organization’s objectives?
•  Were the assessed risks for completion of the coaching programme justified, or did 

they understate/exaggerate the true risk?
•  About the ‘control group’: How does the productivity of those individuals who 

undertook the coaching programme compare with the productivity of workers 
with similar skills who were not offered the opportunities?

For the case study in the national Health Service, a summative evaluation of the 
activity was carried out to assess its effectiveness and value in terms of the goals, objec-
tives and scope of the programme as initially defined. This included both process and 
impact evaluations.

The evaluation aims to provide answers to the following key questions:

1  What has the coaching and mentoring programme achieved by meeting its 
objectives?

2  What impact has the programme had in the region and what is its contribution to 
achieving the strategy goals of the health services in the region?

The principal aim of the evaluation is therefore to assess the direct and indirect impact 
of the coaching and mentoring programme in terms of its remit to health service 
mentoring across a region (and in several areas identified in the regional strategy and 
corporate plan).

impact evaluation requires one to link the input of a project to its output and out-
come. it is an effective way to demonstrate value for money and to assess the extent 
to which the project has met it aims and objectives. in order to understand what 
works, so that lessons can be learnt for future improvement, one needs to carry out a 
process evaluation. This requires one to examine the process of the project implemen-
tation and to investigate the success and failures of activities involved in the project 
as a whole.

impact and process evaluation complement each other. There are two approaches 
from the evaluation strategy, and they are summarized in Figure 10.2.



 Evaluation 209

Process evaluation
The process evaluation aims at assembling good practice information. in the initial 
universal integrated framework (UiF) coaching and mentoring programme 
(2004–5), a process evaluation was carried out by looking for ‘success stories’ that 
might show something about good coaching and mentoring practice. detailed 
retrospective cases studies of a number of coachees and mentees were collected. 
An assessment of the successes of the coaching and mentoring activities – and 
hence of the improved quality of coaching and mentoring – was also conducted. 
Brief descriptions of each activity and of its impact were collected in order to 
determine what worked by carrying out semi-structured interviews with coachees 
and mentees (results are given below).

The views of professional coaches who were not engaged with the UiF coaching 
and mentoring programme but who used the coaching self-review online tool were 
also elicited. These professionals provided feedback about the value that the tool 
might add to their activities and the benefit(s) they gained from it.

The data collected from the process evaluation were mostly qualitative. data 
analyses usually involve interpreting the interview transcript and the text. Usually a 
number of key themes emerge from the qualitative data analyses. A number of 
qualitative research methods might be used.

Impact evaluation
The overall focus in impact evaluation is on the impact of the project as a whole. in 
practice, the evaluation requires one to drill down to the aims and objectives of the 
project and to assess the extent to which they have been met. This is done by mapping 
the output and outcome of each aim and objective of the project.

Some of the objectives of the UiF coaching and mentoring programme are:

•  to support and develop coaching and mentoring;
•  to improve the quality of coaching and mentoring;
•  to increase the performance of coachees and mentees;
•  to build a coaching and mentoring network.

For each of these objectives, some key performance targets for measurement were 
identified.

Input Process Output Outcome

Process evaluation

Impact evaluation

Figure 10.2 evaluation methodology



210 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Measuring outcome
The impact evaluation methodology requires one to link  measures of the input–
output (project action) to measures of the outcome. our first step is to link the pro-
gramme’s coaching and mentoring objectives to its aims. For each aim and objective, 
key performance indicators can be identified. These are  summarized in Figure 10.3.

Input data
The impact evaluation drew on the following sources of data sets:

•  demographic data from the coaching database;
•  processed data from lists of participants;
•  supportive data (e.g. research reports and pilot activity reports);
•  qualitative data from interviews, discussions and consultations.

The nature of the impact evaluation was mostly quantitative, with some qualitative 
descriptive data that would be fed into the process evaluation. Appropriate statistical 
analyses were performed, as data sets were large enough.

Evaluation of the Universal Integrated Framework

This section demonstrates how the evaluation of the UiF was carried out in one of 
the case studies described in Chapter 9. in this case study, the coaching and mentor-
ing programme was introduced in a health and social care setting. The programme 
required delegates to commit to mentoring or coaching for up to four days, over a 
12-month period. They were introduced to the UiF via a wide range of coaching and 
mentoring techniques and practical exercises (see Chapter 8). According to the 
 guiding principle of coach and coachee fluidity (see Chapter 6), all participants first 
became coachees or mentees and were paired with appropriate coaches or mentors 
within the organization. They then became coaches or mentors for the others once 
they were competent enough to act as such.

Aims and 
objectives

Choose/define
indicator

Set targets

Verify results

Feedback: 
Conclusion and

recommendations

Figure 10.3 impact evaluation



 Evaluation 211

As described in Chapter 6, the UiF aims to help participants in the programme to 
get feedback on their performance from their coachees; an online tool – the cultural 
and social competence self-assessment questionnaire (CSC SAQ) – was developed, 
which embedded cross-cultural coaching and mentoring competence. This tool gen-
erally provides assessments on the personal effectiveness of coaches and mentors and 
helps them to generate a personal development plan for use in supervision. in the case 
study under review, individuals were asked to assess themselves on coaching indicators 
by using the online tool. The CSC was developed on the basis of the UiF. it aimed to 
help mentors and coaches especially in their development of emotional intelligence 
from a cultural perspective. in total, the tool had four dimensions (personal, social, 
cultural and professional) and 18 elements with 110 questions.

The UiF framework benefit that the case study identified was that it enabled 
 participants to embed the core skills and the process into the organization in a sustain-
able way; as a result, these core skills significantly impacted upon the way in which the 
coachees and mentees worked.

To realize this benefit, the team measured how supervision and continuous 
professional development (CPd) contributed to the success of the leadership 
programme. The online CSC tool provided information as well as feedback through 
supervision, which yielded qualitative data. These data allowed the team to gather 
evidence on best practice and to make recommendations for future practice.

in order to ensure that the CSC tool was amenable to statistical analysis, the key 
performance indicator (KPi) and the evidence of increase in work performance and 
progress would need to be decided in terms of:

•  quality;
•  quantity;
•  personal effectiveness;
•  the overall effectiveness of the organization.

For the statistical evaluation of the CSC tool with the 18 elements described in 
Chapter 6, a linear multi-variate regression can be used. The general equation is in the 
following form:

 0 1= + +i jY b b X u  (10.1)

where

Y represents KPi;
X

i
 represents the elements of CSC X

1
, X

2
, … X

n
;

b
0
 is the ‘intercept’ of the linear regression;

b
1
 represents the coefficients of the ei elements; and

u
j
 represents the random variables.

The demographic element and the ethnicity – as well as the CSC scores (across the 
three dimensions of the UiF) of the participants in the coaching programme – could 
also be used as explanatory variables X

i
. Thus the CSC tool should have the partici-

pant’s categories according to the census. one also needs to decide what KPi should 
be used for the variable Y. This may be coaching competence, salary earned or scores 
from the 360-degree feedback.



212 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

As stated earlier, a full evaluation of the mentoring and coaching strategy and of 
its implementation as an approach to support leadership development was carried out 
using questionnaires, focus groups and the coaching competence online CSC tool, 
the results of which were presented to the Special Group in the Second Coaching 
Psychology Annual national Conference (Law, ireland and Hussain, 2005) and 
 subsequently published (Law, ireland and Hussain, 2006).

Results

The data from the online CSC tool were statistically analysed by using the participant 
competency scores against overall rating scores. owing to missing values in some data 
fields, the initial 49 respondents were reduced to 23 (the complete data set after the 

Table 10.1 Correlations between each of the UiF dimension and the  
coaching competence

Personal Social Cultural EI Coaching

Personal Pearson correlation 1 0.653** 0.415* 0.739** 0.644**
Sig. (2-tailed) 0.001 0.049 0.000 0.001
Sum of squares and 
cross-products 0.602 0.577 0.443 0.543 0.344
Covariance 0.027 0.026 0.020 0.025 0.016
N 23 23 23 23 23

Social Pearson correlation 0.653** 1 0.713** 0.925** 0.538**
Sig. (2-tailed) 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.008
Sum of squares and 
cross-products 0.577 1.298 1.117 0.998 0.422
Covariance 0.026 0.059 0.051 0.045 0.019
N 23 23 23 23 23

Cultural Pearson correlation 0.415* 0.713** 1 0.882** 0.367
Sig. (2-tailed) 0.049 0.000 0.000 0.085
Sum of squares and 
cross-products 0.443 1.117 1.890 1.149 0.347
Covariance 0.020 0.051 0.086 0.052 0.016
N 23 23 23 23 23

ei Pearson correlation 0.739** 0.925** 0.882** 1 0.572**
Sig. (2-tailed) 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.004
Sum of squares and 
cross-products 0.543 0.998 1.149 0.897 0.373
Covariance 0.025 0.045 0.052 0.041 0.017
N 23 23 23 23 23

Coaching Pearson correlation 0.644** 0.538** 0.367 0.572** 1
Sig. (2-tailed) 0.001 0.008 0.085 0.004
Sum of squares and 
cross-products 0.344 0.422 0.347 0.373 0.474
Covariance 0.016 0.019 0.016 0.017 0.022
N 23 23 23 23 23

**Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
*Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).



 Evaluation 213

missing data were excluded in the analyses). The findings supported the survey and 
the use of the UIF model for coaching and mentoring. The results are summarized as 
follows:

•  UIF dimensions There were significant correlations between personal competence, 
social competence (understanding, empowering, communication, facilitation of 
conflict, leadership facilitation, team coaching and coaching for change), cultural 
competence (appreciation of, respect for and championing different ways of being 
or doing) and coaching competence (measured by the 360-degree feedback question-
naire) (overall p < 0.05). See Table 10.1 for the summary of the statistics. Social com-
petence, with its link with authenticity, was the best predictor of all-round competency 
(overall p < 0.01).

•  Age Competence increased with age/life experience; see Figure 10.4 (ANOVA F 
(3, 31) = 9.66; p < 0.00015).

•  Gender There were no gender differences; see Figure 10.4 (t(17) = 2.11; p = 0.52).
•  Ethnicity and culture Like in the survey, the highest rated coaches and mentors 

were black participants, followed by Asians and then by whites in the analysis of 
total competency scores; see Figure 10.5 (ANOVA F(2, 23) = 6.57; p = 0.006). 
The result implies that people with cross-cultural experience or dual cultural 
 heritage (in this case, indicated by the ethnicity within the UK context) may 
 significantly leverage change by utilizing their cultural competence.

Benefits of Coaching and Mentoring to Organizations

The practical benefits of coaching and mentoring have been widely documented. The 
literature review undertaken by Garvey and Garrett (2005) for the East Mentoring 
Forum describes the main benefits as being broadly in the areas of motivational 

Figure 10.4 Competence increased with age



214 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

aptitude, knowledge and skills development, managing change and succession, and 
business performance benefits; both coaches and coachees were shown to gain from 
the relationship.

Commonly, motivational benefits for the mentee in the research literature are cited 
in terms of career advancement, improved commitment to business and organization, 
improved job satisfaction and increased income. Knowledge and skills development 
for mentees are cited in terms of improved abilities and skills, faster learning, enhanced 
decision making, and improved understanding of business and organizational work-
ings (e.g. politics, policies, enhanced positive risk-taking and improved support for 
innovation).

By managing change and succession, mentees gain in confidence and well-being. This 
is part of the development of their leadership abilities and behaviours, which in turn are 
supportive of change. For coaches and mentors, research studies cite improved job 
performance through an enhanced understanding and knowledge of other  perspectives, 
improved communication, increased appreciation of cultures, improved self-awareness, 
job satisfaction and loyalty, rejuvenation, and opening up to new opportunities. Business 

Female
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Male
Gender

C
o
m

p
e
te

n
ce

Figure 10.5 Coaching competence: female vs male participants

Black Asian White
0%

10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%

Ethnicity

S
co

re
s

Figure 10.6 Coaching competence: differences between ethnic groups



 Evaluation 215

benefits identified through the review of the literature include reduction in staff turn-
over, improvement in retention, improved flow of communication, opportunity for 
talent management, improvement in organizational learning, increased knowledge 
transfer, effective and cost-effective training.

The benefits for the health and social care sector have also been cited in research 
commissioned in 2004 by the leadership centre of the nHS and the department of 
health. They include the impact of mentoring on doctors, identified improved reflec-
tion skills, support for dealing with specific problems, and findings to the effect that 
coaching and mentoring promote nurses’ growth and development into future leaders 
(Madison, 1994). Benefits identified by nurses include: enhanced thinking, risk 
 taking, increased self-esteem, greater wisdom, political awareness, job enrichment and 
performance. developing strategies to deal with and resolve problems was identified 
by doctors as an organizational benefit. Coachees and mentees mentioned benefits in 
the area of support for changing the way things were done and for making significant 
changes of direction, confidence building in decision making, improved self-worth 
and job satisfaction. Mentors stated that their motivation and job satisfaction had 
increased too: they reported, namely, greater satisfaction about developing talents. 
They also experienced improved relations with colleagues and patients through an 
enhanced awareness of others’ perspectives and enhanced problem-solving skills.

in some approaches coaches and mentors may benefit as much as the coachees and 
mentees, if not even more (this is often the case when chief executives are involved); 
but, overall, coachees and mentees benefit more than others. More studies cite moti-
vational benefits, business and organizational performance improvement, and skills 
and knowledge development as the primary benefits. in short, the main benefits to 
coachees and mentees are improved performance and productivity, career opportu-
nities and advancement, improved knowledge and skills, and greater confidence and 
well-being. For coaches and mentors, the primary benefits are improved performance, 
greater satisfaction, loyalty and self-awareness, and leadership development. Business 
outcomes are primarily staff retention, improved motivation and relationships and 
enhanced knowledge and organizational learning.

However, mentoring and coaching have a specific contribution to make to a 
learning organization dealing with an evolving and complex agenda. The mentor or 
coach is required to move between the spectrum of coaching or mentoring seamlessly, 
paying attention to how the individual is responding to change at a personal level and 
balancing that person’s whole life with the requirement to facilitate the meeting of 
short-term targets at the same time as constantly reworking longer term scenarios and 
planning for them. Participants gain from having time to think, reflect and review 
their learning in a safe environment, to the benefit of the organization as well as for 
their personal development. A regular focus on learning is useful to ensure that their 
thinking and action are sustainable. A review of any changes in the environment is 
essential.

in a region-wide nHS survey of the benefits of coaching and mentoring in 2004, 
82 per cent of the participants found the experience good or excellent. Benefits to the 
mentees were grouped into four areas: motivation and positive view of work; learning 
and skills acquisition; career development; change management and innovation. in 
the motivation category, coachees and mentees described feeling valued and making 
a positive contribution. one of them stated: ‘even in these difficult times, i feel i am 



216 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

learning new things and my morale is high when people around me want to give up.’ 
Another co-coachee described the experience as ‘life-changing’, and another one 
stated: ‘it has enabled me to see where i can go and the route to being the manager 
that i want to be.’ Under learning and skills acquisition, many identified ‘increased 
political awareness and how the wider system works’ as a key learning area. Six mem-
bers of staff identified career development through promotion and attributed it to 
the mentoring or coaching experience to some degree; but many more in group and 
individual responses identified increased ‘role activity’, such as taking on more 
and diverse roles, working across boundaries, wider networking, joining new groups 
and project streams, and having a ‘fuller participation in the work of the Trust as a 
whole’. Under change management participants identified that they were ‘more likely 
to take calculated risks to achieve a goal and feel more resilient in this fickle system’.

Benefits to coaches and mentors were cited in similar categories. in the motivation 
category, chief executives and directors reported motivation through an ‘enjoyment 
of real relationships outside the line, discussions beyond the short term, nurturing 
talent’. They described learning about ‘different perspectives and blocks in the system 
that i didn’t know were there, re-honing my skill base in a way that i can transfer to 
how i deal with other colleagues and staff and learning from others about implement-
ing best practice on black and minority ethnic issues’. Some mentors and coaches 
described a ‘buzz of supporting others in leading innovation – helping them get over 
the barriers’. Benefits for coaches and mentors were increased for those who also 
attended supervision.

organizational benefits were cited as ‘working with new Trustees on the Foundation 
Trust boards to understand their role and impact more quickly’; ‘development of con-
fident creative leaders’; ‘new out-the-line communication which brings new life into 
the system and different perspectives’; and ‘value for money because it is working on 
real issues and a way to spot and harness talent’.

The number of coaches and mentees looking for new ways to access e-mentoring 
has increased enormously. e-mentoring has been shown to be effective at enabling 
coaching and mentoring to work beyond boundaries, breaking down cross-cultural 
barriers, combating isolation and making early links with innovative practice. it has 
formed part of the organization’s fast-track programmes and supported international 
BMe (black, minority and ethnic) programmes. Sheffield Hallam University 
(Megginson, Stokes and Garrett-Harris, 2003) found that 75 per cent of the mentees 
using e-mentoring stated that they had gained a lot from the experience.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

This chapter has shown that conducting an evaluation of a coaching and mentoring 
programme can be labour intensive. Such evaluation should therefore be carried out 
collaboratively wherever this is possible: among programme managers, coaches and 
mentors, coachees and mentees, and all other stakeholders. Leading responsibilities 
need to be defined in the early stages of the programme, so that accountability is 
understood. Although evaluation may seem technical in terms of methods, coaches 
and programme managers should not regard it as a specialist activity, otherwise the 
evaluation runs the risk of being sidelined.



 Evaluation 217

The results of the evaluation of the UiF have shown a positive correlation between 
personal competence, social competence and cultural competence. The results should 
come as no surprise, as they are in line with the theoretical perspective of emotional 
intelligence (ei). When people are more self-aware, they manage social and cultural 
situations more competently. However, the implication of our study to the current 
debate in ei research in terms of its concept, measurement and evaluation may be 
quite profound, as will be discussed in the final chapter.

The findings of the evaluation investigated here may also be attributed to the 
more comprehensive training of diverse leaders through the coaching and mentoring 
programme – especially BMe leaders compared with white senior managers, who 
relied on previous training and experience. We thus recommend that more coaching 
and mentoring programmes be warranted as part of the diversity training for white 
staff working with BMe groups as coaches and mentors. From the feedback of those 
who participated in the programme, white delegates have much to gain by including 
BMe participants in coaching and mentoring – as well as in organizational change. 
BMe participants seem to show an aptitude for a higher cultural appreciation when 
they apply their experience to the work context, as well as in their engagement with 
the players. This may be due to the fact that the majority of them were likely to have 
had cross-cultural experiences or a dual cultural heritage. This aptitude adds support 
to the approach of integrated work streams of coaches and mentors to make the most 
of talent pools; it also backs the UiF approach, which emphasizes the importance of 
having coaches and mentors who have cultural appreciation as part of any wider 
coaching and mentoring initiative.

Further research is being carried out to explore the validity of individual elements 
of the UiF by increasing the size of a sample and by showing how the UiF can be 
utilized to aid coaches and mentors to develop their competence. Some practical rec-
ommendations can be made here. To ensure a coordinated approach to conducting 
the evaluation of a coaching and mentoring programme, organizations should con-
sider how evaluation is integrated into the decision-making processes and corporate 
governance structures. Coaches and programme managers should:

•  establish a formal evaluation process as part of the coaching and mentoring 
programme;

•  formalize access to internal and external coaches and mentors;
•  discuss evaluation methodology with the sponsors;
•  provide incentives for conducting thorough and timely evaluations;
•  maintain an accessible archive of the lessons learnt.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Conclusion, discussion, Future 
Research and development

Introduction

This chapter not only provides a summary of our ‘conversation’ so far about the 
 psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning; it also discusses the research and 
development that need to be done from this point on, and it offers recommendations 
for better learning through coaching and mentoring. in doing so, it draws together the 
diverse strands of theories and practice in coaching, mentoring and learning processes.

From the evaluation report in Chapter 10 as well as from my continuous coaching 
practice, it has become clear to me that diversity has been, and will continue to be, 
high on many organizations’ agendas. From this perspective, the discussion focuses 
on the following areas:

•  matching between coaches and coachees;
•  emotional intelligence and cross-cultural competence;
•  evidence-based research and impact assessment;
•  supervision;
•  training;
•  coaching and mentoring standards;
•  ethics and code of conducts;
•  the broader legal framework.

Matching between Coaches and Coachees

Viewed through the lens of diversity, matching is an important stage in the coaching 
process. Getting the right match between coaches and coachees ensures the success 
of the coaching outcome. it is an effective way of leveraging cultural change and 

11



220 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

diversity within organizations. organizations have therefore focused on the development 
of sound matching systems, including electronic database access, to deliver close matches 
in a range of organizational, technological and interpersonal contexts.

one approach is systematically working through a matching matrix. A matching 
matrix can be constructed on the basis of the universal integrated framework (UiF)/ 
integrative learning system (iLS) and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) models 
described in Chapters 6 and 7 (see Table 11.1).

Translating the matrix into the matching process takes the following steps (working 
through each row and column):

1  establishing the goal/purpose of each stakeholder (coach, coachee) and establish-
ing the overall objective/priority of the team/group/community, taking the 
cultural and organizational perspectives into account;

2  identifying possible barriers or problems that all the stakeholders may face during 
the coaching journey;

3 identifying possible strategies to overcome those barriers or problems;
4  setting out a number of coaching options in terms of styles, techniques and 

orientation;
5  considering the socio-demographic factors – for example, age, belief systems/

faiths/religions, culture/race, gender and social barrier/disability;
6  considering the X-factor – for example, attributes, creativity, personality, emo-

tional intelligence, cultural and professional competence and so on;
7 drawing a conclusion about how to match the rows and columns in Table 11.1.

Humphrey and Holland (2006) suggest that, by working through the matching 
matrix, one can ‘deselect those coaches whose purpose is not identified’. However, 
in  my view, from a cross-cultural perspective and according to the UiF/iLS, the 
community/organizational culture takes precedence. in other words decision makers 
should tolerate some ambiguity in the setting of personal coaching goals, provided 
that the group’s, community’s or organization’s goals are clear. This allows the goal 
to develop through the coaching journey. Moreover, one should realize that not 
all the factors in the matching matrix are of equal weight. For example, shared values 
and goals are more important than individual styles and approaches in effective 
collaboration.

Table 11.1 Matching matrix on the basis of UiF vs CBT

Matching criteria
Coachee/
Mentee

Coach/
Mentor

Funder/
Owner

Team/Group/
Community

Culture (includes 
organizational)

objectives
Problems/issues
Strategies
options
Socio-demographics
X-factor
Matching decision



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 221

Constructing matching criteria is the first and probably the easiest step in the 
coaching process. There are many ways of designing a matching matrix, depending on 
individual or organizational requirements (see Humphrey and Holland, 2006). You 
can construct your own matrix and be your own matchmaker.

Successful matching is as much about the choice and training of the broker as it 
is about the criteria of selection. eastern cultures have long recognized the role of 
 brokers in relationship matching. A broker brings together potential partners, often on 
the basis of background – education, status and qualities that are compatible. Yet the 
role and impact of the matchmaker as undertaken by the coordinator has rarely been 
examined in coaching psychology research.

Bearing in mind the lack of research on the role of the coordinator, previously 
we focused on the criteria for success in matching. one finding was the importance of 
the matchmaker in helping the client choose someone different from him-or herself. 
There is a widespread assumption that homogeneous pairings produce better results. 
interpersonal attraction research has shown that similarity in attitudes, political beliefs 
and religiosity predicts attraction (Byrne and nelson, 1965). Veitch and Griffitt 
(1976) identified the fact that positive emotional reactions increased liking.

Factors such as geographical proximity and levels of professional and cultural com-
petence also play an important part in successful outcomes (ireland, Hussain and Law, 
2006). These factors have an implication in terms of explaining why it is that the ideal 
self we portray for matching and our actual self may be different (Buss and Barnes, 
1986). Thus the tendency to select coachees with attributes similar to one’s own may 
be mistaken. After all, characteristics that predict initial attraction may not predict 
long-term satisfaction. The UiF evaluation points in the opposite direction where 
matching coaches or coachees with mentors or mentees is at stake. it has shown 
that coaching outcomes are more positive if the coach and the coachee have different 
temperaments according to the Myers–Briggs Type indicator.

Matching for success

To summarize the lessons learnt from the evaluation and case studies, the main match-
ing conditions for success include:

•  location or geography of both partners;
•  appropriate distance in the pairing by level;
•  commitment of mentor and mentee to each other;
•  early interest and affirmation from the mentor to the mentee;
•  choice of diverse ethnic and cultural background of mentor to match the 

mentees;
•  cultural competence of mentors and coaches;
•  active involvement in the pairing process;
•  option generation of at least two possible matches;
•  insight and understanding of each other (coaches and coachees; mentors and 

mentees) in terms of personality type, strengths and weakness.

All the key points above indicate that the role of the broker/matchmaker was key 
in less experienced participants. A broker/coordinator was able to move people 



222 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

outside their comfort zone and make them opt for features more dissimilar to their 
own in order to promote learning. The need for information to fill gaps about 
potential  partners decreased as trust in the broker rose and shared goals or values 
and mutual commitment became clear. Criterion-based matching using forms 
alone was rarely sufficient for facilitating a match in mentoring or with inexperi-
enced participants.

The role of electronic mentoring matching

Another implication is about the role of electronic mentoring matching. There are 
some useful elements in such systems. Advantages include:

•  flexibility: coaching and mentoring conversation can take place anywhere, any 
time, or just in time;

•  rich information from the online search: this encourages involvement in the 
 process through self-directed data search;

•  time: online research saves time: it alleviates requirements for matchers to offer 
this initial service and saves the broker intervention for the later, more crucial 
stages in the process;

•  cost: the above advantages also involve a significant cost saving in the matching 
process.

To ensure cost-effectiveness, electronic database-driven systems should be part of 
a whole system rather than a standalone, off-the-shelf package (e.g. a web-based 
programme with mentors and mentees taking responsibility for inputting their 
own data). This is in effect a self-driven system. As participants mature, matching 
programmes need to be capable of meeting their changing needs. Coordinators 
require any system to enable them to keep abreast of matches – types and numbers of 
registered pairings – so that they can monitor relationship outcomes and engage with 
participants over supervision and training opportunities.

The roles of the broker in mentoring and coaching matching are:

•  negotiation: bringing realism and confirmation of shared values into goal planning 
and expectation setting;

•  mediation and stretch: managing the mismatch of expectations and reality, chal-
lenging self-limitations that reduce the learning potential of the pair;

•  facilitation: building mutual commitment to working together on shared goals, 
enabling the sharing of enough information and leveraging the mutual benefits to 
steer the participants to affirm the match; clarifying confusions and contextual-
izing information, spotting and diffusing barriers to the match at an individual 
and pair level;

•  synthesis: mirroring back what is agreed between the parties and establishing a 
framework for moving forward, establishing the psychological contract to work 
together before the formal introductory letter/email/agreement is sent;

•  ongoing support up to session contract/agreement: after this stage, the coach–
coachee pair moves on to a collective support system through supervision; the 
coordinator may then exit at this point.



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 223

What to look for in a coordinator

Apart from sharing some of the attributes described in this book for coaches and 
 mentors, a coordinator should have the following attributes:

•  emotional intelligence across cultures;
•  interpersonal skills evidenced across a range of media (computer literacy);
•  networking skills;
•  credibility in coaching or mentoring;
•  leadership (inspiring people, meeting customer needs, managing change, resources, 

projects, capability, systems development and planning);
•  cultural understanding;
•  influencing and negotiation skills (direct and indirect);
•  facilitation skills.

As you would notice, many of the above skills are present in effective coaches and 
mentors; this makes it a natural progression for them to move into a coordinating 
role. Coaching and mentoring would be more effective if we were to pay more 
attention to careful matching in terms of the above requirements, as well as respect 
for diversity and confidentiality as part of the code of ethics.

Emotional Intelligence and Cross-Cultural Competence

This book has been advocating an integrative learning system (iLS) as a coaching and 
mentoring approach. it has evolved from the initial proposal of the universal integrated 
framework (UiF), which considers the fluidity of coaches’/mentors’ and coachees’/
mentees’ roles and learning. evidence from the evaluation of UiF confirms that  mentors 
learn as much, if not more, from mentees as they do from other coaches and mentors. 
The evaluation also implies that coaching, mentoring and learning are interrelated, as are 
their measurements (e.g. emotional intelligence (ei) and professional and cultural 
 competence). They should therefore be tackled together in a systemic way, as demon-
strated in the case studies. For instance, the debate about whether ei is a cognitive ability 
or a personality-like trait (Mayer, diPaolo and Salovey, 1990; Mayer and Salovey, 1993, 
1997) has important implications for its measurement, and hence for its evaluation.

in terms of measurement, academic discussion has focused on two key questions:

1  Should ei be measured by self-reporting (as administered in the coaching and 
mentoring programme reported in our case study)?

2 Should the respondents’ performance be measured instead?

Some researchers make a rigid distinction between the ei trait and cognitive ei and 
propose the following conditional rules (for example, see Petrides, Furnham and 
Frederickson, 2004; Petrides, Frederickson and Furnham, 2004):

•  if one regards ei as a trait like personality, then it should be measured by 
self-reporting.



224 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

•  if ei is conceptually treated as a cognitive ability, then the measurement should 
be performance-based.

it is not helpful to adopt a rigid binary position (either/or) when one is using ei as 
a  learning tool for intervention. nevertheless, the above distinction may be used 
to  guide us to design and evaluate the research and development of ei and its 
 applications, such as in coaching and mentoring. For example, many current ei meas-
urements in academic research and commercial markets (in the form of tests or inven-
tories) can be evaluated according to the following criteria:

•  do they have a clear theoretical framework?
•   do they have complete coverage of all the relevant dimensions and essential 

elements?
•   Have they addressed measurement issues – defining responses, internal consis-

tency, factor structure and construct validity?
•  Have they adequately matched the measurement to the theoretical concept?

The case study has shown that we can use self-reporting complemented by 360-degree 
feedback to assess ei and infer the correlation between self-perception and performance-
based ability in our evaluation. The correlation between personal competence, social 
competence and cultural competence also supports the view that coaching is never cul-
turally neutral. However, one must be cautious in drawing a conclusion from the results, 
as a correlation does not mean causation. The results may imply that change is culturally 
sensitive to context and that the coachees, mentees and the setting need to be fully 
understood and engaged with to ensure success. Best practice cannot be established and 
sustained using techniques not tuned to the context for implementation. The players 
involved need to feel valued and appreciated.

Participants with a cross-cultural background did particularly well in the overall coach-
ing competence ratings. This is consistent with the UiF/iLS, which identifies the impor-
tance of cross-cultural working as it applies to individuals and settings. This is a welcome 
result, since research and the everyday media coverage have tended for too long to focus 
on the negative representation of other social groups rather than on positive regard for 
them. For those secure in themselves, comfort lies in the continuity of one’s learning and 
widening friendships. This is called ‘allophilia’ and may be associated with positive behav-
iours and/or generalization; but it is always associated with positive regard for another 
social group. it seems that only those who foster allophilia can be positively curious 
enough to leverage optimum mentoring and coaching opportunities. This attitude is 
even more important in today’s context, not only for living in harmony within our local 
community, but also globally, for resolving international conflicts, which often involve a 
complex relationship between cultural and (spiritual) belief dimensions.

Evidence-Based Research: Coaching Assessment  
and Impact Evaluation

organizations have an ongoing interest in deriving the benefits they are securing from 
any change interventions and in establishing benchmarks for performance. As such, 
the cultural and social competence (CSC) tool has been found to be very effective in 



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 225

helping coaches and mentors to manage their own development and organizational 
plan to address areas of reduced performance. The CSC tool made the coaching 
 process more transparent but also ensured it was coachee-driven throughout. it takes 
one more step to help organizations to explore the link between the quality of the 
coach (or mentor) and the coaching outcomes and to capitalize on it. impact 
assessment is an important part of the coaching process, not an add-on. it can be 
developmental, itself enabling all participants to get involved and increase their 
knowledge of wider agendas and systems. The impact assessment process can provide 
new opportunities to re-engage with stakeholders in new ways and establish new 
approaches forward. evaluation can be done by consultants, by in-house teams, or 
through an integrated impact, online management system. The last one is particularly 
effective when a sponsor wants to establish core baseline assessment and inter-agency 
comparisons, where there is a cross-cultural and geographical spread of participating 
agencies in a programme and when the participating entities have access to the 
internet.

As coaching is still an emerging industry, demonstrating its benefit through 
 evidence-based research and impact evaluation will be increasingly demanded by 
sponsors, players and buyers in the field. Coordinators need to make the most of the 
opportunities they have to influence the strategists and sponsors on the key objectives 
that have to be assessed and to find new ways of incorporating softer sets of data into 
a robust mix of evidence. The notion of sustainability needs to be a shared focus for 
sponsors, stakeholders and coordinators alike. An evidence base is merely the starting 
point for wider discussions and a lever to do things better. You do not have to wait 
for the agreement of a strategic plan to get going. in the meantime, it is also useful 
to compile case studies (see Chapter 9) or simple examples of how coaching or men-
toring has helped individuals or organizations improve their performance. evaluation 
of coaching programmes is part of the continuous learning cycle designed to help 
individuals and organizations achieve their aspirations.

Supervision and coaching training

The evaluation of the UiF has confirmed that attention to the personal, the social and 
the cultural dimensions of settings and players is also required for integrating supervi-
sion as part of iLS and of the continuous professional development (CPd) of the 
coaches and mentors. in the sister study that addressed the benefits of training, these 
results were also replicated; but they were linked to the importance of training (T ) and 
supervision (S) for the improved quality (Q ) of coaches and mentors. The increase in 
the benefits cited was in direct proportion to the quality of the coach or mentor, thus:

 kB Q=  (11.1)

where B represents benefits; Q represents the quality of the coach or mentor; and k is 
a constant.

Constituting the ingredients of the coach’s or mentor’s quality – that is, T for 
training and S supervision – we have:

 k( )B T S= +  (11.2)



226 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

The supervision frameworks have focused on the CPd (or D, for short) and on 
improving the quality of the coach (Q ) through reflective practice (R):

 S D Q= +  (11.3)

Substituting the components of S in equation 11.2, we have:

 k( )B T D Q= + +  (11.4)

As training in this context is coaching training, we can replace T with C for coaching 
and formulate the final equation for realizing the coaching benefits:

 k( )B C D Q= + +  (11.5)

Representing the above equation in a general form, as described in Chapter 10 – namely:

 0 1 i jY b b X u= + +  (10.1)

we have:

 0 1( ) jY b b C D Q u= + + + +  (11.6)

where Y represents the coaching benefit (B); b
0
 means ‘intercept’; b

1
 stands for the 

coefficients of the ei elements; and u
j
 is the random variable.

The CSC tool has been continuously developed in a range of online education 
programmes, in the UK and internationally. it helps the learners’ CPd and 
development of good practice. Participants in the programmes have been using the 
CSC elements (X

i
) to inform their reflective practice in supervision through peer 

coaching. Thus we could assess the quality of coaches and their CPd and coaching 
by using the results of the CSC tool as a proxy measurement. The predicted 
coaching benefits (Y ) can be computed in advance. The effectiveness of the 
coaching programme, the validity and reliability of the coaching model can be eval-
uated by comparing the actual outcome with the predicted benefits of any coach-
ing intervention. Future research into the validation of the general coaching 
equation given above will have an important impact on the evidence-based coach-
ing practice.

The results so far indicate that many coaches feel less confident and less prepared 
about the personal (ei) and cultural dimensions of their CPd. Future training pro-
grammes for mentoring and coaching should therefore:

•  include more focus on personal development (especially cross-cultural ei);
•  incorporate cultural appreciation as a core element.

These elements are increasingly important in our world of greater complexity and 
increasing conflicts among beliefs and values, especially for those who work in unfamiliar 
contexts, with people from a different profession and background.



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 227

Coaching and Mentoring Standards

in 2007, at the time of writing the first edition, a lot of work was being done in the 
development of standards, competencies and kite marks, the requirement for stan-
dardization across the coaching and mentoring profession being one of the hottest 
topics. in 2005, david Lane unveiled the european Mentoring and Coaching 
Council’s (eMCC) kite mark scheme for coaching and mentoring at its annual 
conference in Zurich. The eMCC aimed to provide a benchmark for others to 
share these  standards. its kite mark scheme was based on the core competencies. it 
allows organizations to audit quality in terms of processes, procedures and outputs. 
The outcomes of coaching and mentoring still needs to be evaluated, though. While 
eMCC’s kite mark scheme has been up and running for more than half of a decade 
now, during this period of time other professional organizations, such as the 
Association for Coaching (AC), also followed the trend and developed their own 
accreditation process. The British Psychological Society’s Special Group in Coaching 
Psychology, after years of negotiation between its consecutive chairs and its various 
committees and trustees, finally established its first register for coaching psycholo-
gists, which was launched at the beginning of 2012. All these new developments 
signal the maturity of this new profession – coaching. To resonate with my reflection 
in Chapter 2, coaching (and coaching psychology in particular) is truly coming of age.

While establishing a coaching and mentoring standard may be welcomed by some 
(especially those involved in the process) as a way to professionalize the industry, 
many coaches and mentors are still concerned that this may hinder creativity, diversity 
and the development of coaching and mentoring. A lot is at stake for the coaching 
and mentoring companies and organizations as commercial enterprises. Many have 
developed their own standards, competency frameworks and accreditation systems. 
Moreover, like any industrial standard, benchmarking only works if there are sufficient 
numbers of organizations signing up for it and individual coaches and mentors going 
through the assessment process.

Benchmarking itself does not guarantee a standard or an outcome. As different 
coaching and mentoring bodies have different competing standards, the situation 
continues to cause confusion among coaches, mentors and clients. However, this is 
healthy and indicates the developmental process of an evolving discipline. Clients 
may simply need some information about the diversity of the industry and some 
guidance as to how to assess and evaluate the coaching supply that will meet their 
requirements. Just like in the revolution in information technology in the twentieth 
century, the customers (in this case, the coachees) will be the ones to lead the way in 
the long run.

While one may celebrate the professionalization of coaching that the move to stan-
dardization involves, a word of caution is necessary here. First, coaching has captured 
the imagination of its participants because it offers flexibility and variety in how it 
operates. While there are clear features in the process, the latter is looser and less 
structured than other development methods. That is its niche. The Community 
Coaching Café described in Chapter 9 is a good example. There is room within the 
mix to operate across contexts and to meet the needs of different learners at both the 
micro- and the macro-level. The standardization movement has identified the fact 



228 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

that organizations could be audited on ‘quality in terms of processes, procedures and 
outputs’. This takes scrutiny beyond the level of the coaches’ competency, to the 
shaping of a uniform collective development of an integrative learning system (iLS). 
This may go counter to the UiF/iLS principles of encouraging creativity and diver-
sity of practice at macro- and micro-levels. The development of the coaching standard 
is primarily a Western phenomenon that may not be applicable universally across 
 cultures. Quality is rarely linked to one process or to one ideal set of procedures, 
as shown by the formula described earlier and by the evaluation in Chapter 10. of 
course, the use of CSC and of its self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ) in different 
cultures would need to be adapted and translated into the local context and language 
(Law and Fitzgerald, 2012).

An inputs-based model of impact assessment, which addresses learning and 
development (rather than accreditation), involvement and flexibility in CPd (rather 
than forced compliance) and feedback on universal qualities and competencies – 
feedback derived from self-assessment, from colleagues and from coachees – embodies 
a loose but transferable model of practice across different contexts and groups. Further, 
rigid or specified processes and procedures for development are culturally and contextu-
ally bound. Any sustainable standard-setting movement would have to be able to answer 
the following questions:

•  Whose standard and which culture anyway? Bearing in mind that a standardized 
framework is culturally limited, which culture and individuals would predominate 
when it comes to identifying good practice and defining aligned processes and 
procedures?

•  Who sets the standard, and what are the selection criteria? How would power and 
expertise denote who the standard setters were, and how would individuals be 
selected to be a part of those groups?

•  is the standard universal, or is it culturally mindful? in light of global coaching 
programmes, would participation in a predominantly european-centred standard 
be a precursor to involvement?

•  is the standard fit for the purpose of the local community? How much opportunity 
would there be for distinctive local standard setting? What would be the impact on 
small organizations and community groups? How does a standardized approach fit 
with the micro-learning-centred coaching ethos of mutual learning, mutual respect, 
self-determination and partnership?

•  is the standard practical? How would standards be enforced? What is the cost and 
who would pay?

Standards and standardization pose challenges at the level of the contextual variation 
of coaching applications. For example, in some settings the opportunity for coaches to 
train and receive certification would attract coaches to that programme and would 
give credibility to a service. in another setting it would act as a barrier to the fluidity 
of roles in the process and would over-professionalize a service that did not warrant 
it. Coaching is universal insofar as it crosses contexts; but the levels of coaching 
intervention and the depth of the practitioners’ competence vary according to the 
specific needs of the coachees and mentees.



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 229

The route towards standard setting has been travelled before, in other disciplines, 
with mixed success in complex settings. As predicted, the current standards set out 
various requirements for the accredited members’ CPd to be audited; this follows 
from the development of a specialist audit industry designed to fulfil that need. The 
assessment and audit (and perhaps verification) industry may well be connected to the 
very agencies that suggested standard setting in the first place! While one recognizes 
the creativity of a thriving coaching market, there may be real consequences for 
social enterprises doing very valuable community work, which cannot afford to be 
accredited. Those same agencies might find that front-line service-funding allocations 
are reduced to cover the costs of auditing functions. A good example of a similar 
development is the development of social enterprises. Various agencies were devel-
oped and insisted that social enterprises should be registered as community-interest 
companies (CiCs), which requires an additional auditing process. The extra cost and 
the resources required in the process have distracted many social enterprises’ efforts 
and valuable resources from focusing on their initial social cause.

There is probably a mid-point in this debate, where forces – forces of the market, 
the requirement to bring greater clarity, uniform status and professionalism to this 
field, the drive to improve the participants’ coaching experiences and opportunities 
for cross-cultural learning and to create a vigorous, competitive supply sector – come 
to some new realization of a way forward together. However, a loose input-based 
structure – a structure capable of being flexible enough to respond to the diverse 
needs of people and settings and relying on empirical evidence to ascertain the quality 
of individual coaches – makes a significant contribution to shaping some of this debate 
and its practice.

Ethics and Code of Conduct

Apart from the business agenda, the drive for standardization in coaching practices 
underlines an agenda for professionalization in the industries. This raises an important 
issue, which has often been neglected in the debate on professional competence and 
standards: the ethics and code of conduct of coaching and mentoring.

Two key questions help us to consider the development of an ethical framework:

1 What forms should ethical thinking take?
2 What is the impact of ethical principles on the practice of coaching and mentoring?

ethical thinking and its principles are usually embedded in many professional bodies 
in the form of self-regulation. For example, the members of the BPS are required 
to commit to ethical standards and to a code of practice. The main aim is to protect 
clients and the public at large from dangerous practice; and the objectives are to:

•  benefit clients;
•  ensure safety;
•  protect clients;
•  manage boundaries;
•  manage conflict.



230 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

Translating the above objectives into the code of practice requires you as a coach to:

1 do no harm;
2 act in the best interest of your clients and their organization;
3 observe confidentiality;
4 respect differences in culture;
5 apply effectively the best practice in everything you do;
6  help your client to make informed choices and take responsibility to improve his 

or her performance and well-being;
7 recognize your role as a coaching psychologist.

There are many common aspects between these objectives and codes of practice across 
a wide range of professions, such as counselling and psychotherapy (for example, see 
Barnes and Mudin, 2001; Hill and Jones 2003; and the BPS’s Code of Conduct, 
Ethical Principles and Guidelines). However, there are also many aspects that are 
unique to coaching and distinguish coaching psychology from many other disciplines. 
For example, a coach is asked by a director (the budget holder) to coach a team of 
senior managers (the job holders) with the objective of improving their performance 
(see Law, 2003). The term ‘client’ used within this organizational context is very 
 different from the same term used in the contexts of counselling and psychotherapy. 
A number of questions would arise from such a coaching process:

•  Who are the clients?
•  Whose benefit has priority?
•  Whose interests is the coaching psychologist serving?
•  What is the coach’s ethical duty?
•  What is the responsibility of the coaching psychologist to manage different values 

and interests between all the stakeholders?
•  How are the differences managed?
•  is there potential for an abuse of power?
•  What are the issues of confidentiality?
•  What are the implications of vicarious liability?

Managing the multiple boundaries, relationships and conflicts is particularly important 
in the situation described above – and in coaching psychology in general. Coaching is 
different from counselling and therapy. it requires us to have different attitudes, 
knowledge, skills and ethical thinking as part of our professional competence.

ethical principles have an important impact upon wide areas of practice (Law, 
2005a, 2005b, 2006a). These include:

•  coaching;
•  supervision;
•  training;
•  teaching.

While many coaches are happy to engage with clients in their inspirational journey of 
empowerment, they tend to feel uncomfortable when they encounter difficult ethical 



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 231

dilemmas. in order to maximize the clients’ benefit and to protect them from 
 dangerous practice, members are required to adhere to ethical standards and to a code 
of practice in coaching psychology. There are many ethical aspects that are unique to 
our profession and distinguish it from many other disciplines; for instance, managing 
multiple boundaries, relationships and conflicts. Handling such aspects requires us to 
have certain attitudes, knowledge, skills and ethical thinking as part of our professional 
competence.

As coaches, we are expected to:

•  learn as much as we can about ethics;
•  see the others’ views on ethics;
•  look at client management and ethical issues;
•  understand the overlap and the differences between coaching and counselling 

 psychology on ethical issues;
•  know what to do when things go wrong.

While there are many definitions of ethics and ethical principles, i have found the fol-
lowing definition useful, as it captures many of the essential elements as well as 
opening up some other avenues for practical exploration:

ethical principles are defined as the rules which people are committed to because they see 
them as embodying their values and justifying their moral judgements. (Rowson, 2001; 
emphasis added)

This definition seems quite straightforward in principle. it can be translated into the 
following cognitive process (see Figure 11.1):

morality professional judgement rationale values commitment rules→ → → → →

For example, considering values would require us to question ourselves:

•  What are our values?
•  What is the relationship between ethics, codes of conduct and practice?

in practice, this often requires the coaches’ conscious struggle between conflicting 
rights and duties (cf. Solomon, 2000, in a counselling context) – while one may argue 
that the issue of conflict arises in many professions, such as counselling psychology. 
The typical double triad – the relationship between the client’s line-manager, the 
coach and the coachee – in executive coaching increases the prevalence, complexity 
and intensity of the conflicts that coaching psychologists may experience (Figure 11.2).

For instance, on the subject of disclosure about our client’s performance, the following 
ethical questions would arise:

•  Should i tell the truth even if it might affect the client’s well-being?
•  Should i respect the client’s (or the line manager’s, or the subordinate’s) autonomy 

even when this may cause him or her harm?
•  Should i tell this to the client’s line manager?



232 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

in terms of the three-way information flow, disclosure may come from various 
 stakeholders, which sometimes can have a detrimental effect on the coachee. Coaching 
psychologists may need to consider the following questions:

•  What should i do about this piece of information?
•  Why is my coachee’s line manager telling me this about him or her?

Morality

Rationale 

Values 

Commitment

Rules

Professional
judgement

Figure 11.1 Cognitive process in formulation of ethical principles (Law, 2006a)

Line manager/
society

Coachee/
mentee

Subordinate

Coach/
mentor

Supervisor/ 
society

Subordinate

Figure 11.2 A double triad relationship between the client’s line-manager, the coach/
mentor and the coachee/mentee (Law, 2006a)



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 233

•  Why is the coachee telling me this about his or her line-manager?
•  Should i be encouraging the coachee/line manager to report this to the director 

or higher authorities?

Similar questions might be asked if the coaching psychologist is in the supervisor’s 
 position. When making decisions on actions in the area of morality versus opinions, 
one’s professional judgement could be very complex. The conflict resolution depends 
not only on how we define our meaning in terms of self versus culture, truth versus 
facts, but also on the ethical principles we adopt.

if one adopts the principle of duty and accords priority to deontological concerns 
about general and specific duties, one may hold on to the following rules:

•  Tell the truth.
•  Respect confidentiality.
•  Respect autonomy.

if we prefer to apply the teleological principle of utility in our coaching situation, we 
will formulate rules and apply them so as to achieve the best outcome (rule utilitari-
anism). This may take the following form:

•  Goal: seek the best outcome.
•  Action: consider all the options/outcomes before you act (act on the principle of 

utilitarianism).
•  Rule: do x eXCePT y

(note: in the above rule, exceptions are allowed in order to achieve the best outcome. For 
example, tell the truth unless it would harm the client. is this ethical? This is an ethical 
dilemma that calls for one’s professional judgement and may require supervision.)

There is not enough space to address all of these issues here (as ethics is not the 
primary objective of this book). To unpack the complexity of this area would require 
further research and development; it would call for another book, specifically dedi-
cated to ethical choices in relation to coaching. For the time being, interested readers 
may request a copy of the Code of Ethics and Conduct from the British Psychological 
Society (BPS, 2009).

Ethics as a Cross-Cultural Phenomenon

ethics and ethical principles do not translate readily into cross-cultural practice, and 
this is for a range of reasons. First, our commitment to following rules is leveraged by 
a belief that the rules are congruent with our values and sense of morality. our 
enforcement of rules is also linked to our values. Those beliefs and values are time-
bound and subjective, not universally held by people in different cultures, places, 
spaces and circumstances.

For instance, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the slave trade was seen 
as an entirely proper way of dealing with the consequences of colonization, in the 
UK and in europe. Professions have sometimes indicated that their practice was moral 
or ethical, only to overturn that practice later. in modern times the appeal to ethical 



234 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

principles among agencies as a reason not to do something has impacted on the effec-
tiveness of collaborations in multi-agency situations.

in China, since Mao’s agenda of modernization and in contrast with the country’s 
established culture and tradition, a policy was developed to encourage parents to have 
only one child, with sanctions in place for those who would not comply. By contrast, 
in France and other european countries there were incentives to have more children 
in order to sustain economic growth. in China there were concerns over population 
growth and its possible dangers for economic growth. Such cultural differences in the 
employment of a strategy to manage population levels can result in different percep-
tions of morality, depending on the culture from which you look at it.

There is a view that right and wrong are easily discernible to the moral thinker. 
However, right and wrong may be less readily discerned in a complex picture, where a 
whole range of factors are at play and knock-on effects of one action may be damaging 
or potentially outweigh the benefits. only a sense of local knowledge, context aware-
ness and experience can help us discern right from wrong in situations where a network 
of variables interacts with changing local conditions.

This complex picture needs to address the role of history and the experience of 
all players in a situation. The cross-cultural history of a relationship informs how the 
presentation of an ethical position is construed. Where one collective culture has been 
abused or exploited by another and trust is low, ethical principles might be seen as 
hypocritical. The diminishment of the ethical stance of another culture as a platform 
for raising one’s own standing and for capitalizing on advantage further undermines 
trust and partnership.

ethical principles have an uneasy and unclear relationship with actions. if the inten-
tion was ethical but the action was wrong and brought much harm, is that moral or 
immoral? is there knowledge and are there skills that one can acquire that may 
support a developing, growing and adaptable morality?

obviously, the sharing of ethical principles at a broad level is easier than their real-
ization in practice at a local level. The ethical codes of practice, at the level of rules of 
conduct for micro-practice, may be best limited to the context of their origin, where 
the point-to-point correspondence on matters of values, systems, equality of access to 
education and services and work is assured and where hopes and expectations are 
shared.

Within this context, key questions include:

•  does having codes of conduct and standards make us ethical?
•  on whose terms are we ethical?
•  And how long will it last?
•  Are we flexible and continually changing, to keep up with the requirements of 

new situations and the moral challenges they pose?

To answer these questions, we need to address the process of formulating ethical 
 principles rather than the output of that process. We need to go back to basics. our 
process is driven by our coachees, and as such we need to assess and take stock of 
their values, their concept of success, their concept of helpfulness and adapt how we 
work to the local context. We need to consult and be changed rather than assume that 
we will bring change. We need to be genuine, open and humble. only then can we 



 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development 235

build trust. And, if we are lucky, one day someone might describe us as ethical. 
Perhaps that is the point. The phrase ‘ethical practitioner’ is a description assigned 
to us by someone else.

Future Work and Research

From the above discussion, the future work would most likely focus on the following 
areas:

•  refining the universal integrated framework;
•  research on the coaching/mentoring-matching attributes of the coach/coachee 

and mentor/mentee interactions, as well as on the attributes of the matchmaker;
•  developing ethical principles in coaching and mentoring;
•  identifying the ethical implications for the supervision of coaches and mentors;
•  developing quality-control procedures;
•  promoting diversity in coaching and mentoring;
•  developing training in the psychology of coaching and mentoring;
•  embedding ethical principles and the psychology of learning as part of the core 

competence and continual development in our profession.

Chapter Summary and Reflection

our ethical discussion shows that resolving an ethical dilemma is a complex decision-
making process and that understanding ethical principles could provide us with a decision 
aid as well as with a rationale for our professional judgement. When making ethical 
decisions, a coach should not rush to take action but carefully consider the following:

•  Aim to serve your coachees well.
•  Be informed about legal and employment requirements that override limits on 

confidentiality for the particular context.
•  Make these limits clear to your coachees.
•  Consider supplementing your verbal description of limits with a written contract.
•  When practising with extended confidentiality, share on a ‘need to know’ basis.
•  Be trustworthy.
•  discuss with your coachees if breaking confidentiality is necessary.
•  Understand that helping coachees to act is much better than you (the coach) 

 having to act.
•  Accept that life and coaching involve taking risks.
•  discuss the case with a supervisor, a coaching colleague and a manager.
•  Where there is a specific duty or legal requirement for disclosure to a third party, 

warn the coachees during the sessions that, if they tell you more, you will be under 
an obligation to act.

The UiF/iLS advocated in this book requires you (readers) to have commitment to 
learn on the basis of your own direct experience. We believe that to work and to live 
your life this way is both challenging and fulfilling.



236 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning

i would like to end this book by echoing what is said in the preface. From reading 
this book, i hope that, at whatever juncture of your coaching or mentoring journey 
you happen to be (whether you are a coach, a mentor, a coachee, a mentee, or all 
these), you would by now understand that, although throughout this book we have 
advocated a scientific approach, we believe that there is a kind of magic to the art of 
coaching and mentoring. To emphasize the spiritual–magical engagement of coach-
ing and mentoring in action, i recall the exercise that i conducted in one of my coach-
ing sessions for the diverse communities in Peterborough. inspired by the oriah 
Mountain dreamer’s poem ‘My invitation’ – adopted from Jean Houston’s (1998) A 
Passion for the Possible – i inverted the poem, transforming it into questions. i wrote 
it on a piece of paper and folded it into a paper-aeroplane. i threw it to the partici-
pants as a ‘message carried by air’. A participant picked it up, unfolded the  message, 
answered the questions silently and passed it on to the next person in the group, and 
so on… The questions are listed below. Readers may like to participate in this exercise 
by answering them – they are not another emotional intelligence test!

 1 do you dare to dream of your heart’s belonging?
 2  Will you risk looking like a fool for love, for dreams, for the adventure of 

being alive?
 3 Have you touched the centre of your own sorrow?
 4 Have you been opened up by life’s betrayals?
 5  Can you sit with pain, mine or your own, without moving to hide it or make it 

fade or fix it?
 6 Can you be with joy, mine or your own?
 7  Can you dance with wildness and let ecstasy fill you to the tips of your fingers and 

toes without cautioning us to be careful, be realistic, or to remember the limita-
tions of being a human?

 8 Can you disappoint another in order to be true to yourself?
 9 Can you bear the accusation of betrayal and not betray your own soul?
10 Can you be faithful and therefore trustworthy?
11 Can you see beauty even if it’s not pretty everyday?
12 Can you source your life from God’s presence?
13  Can you live with failure, yours and mine, and still stand on the edge of a lake 

and shout to the silver moon, ‘Yes!’?
14  Can you get up after a night of grief and despair, weary, bruised to the bone, and 

do what needs to be done for the children?
15 Will you stand in the centre of the fire with me and not shrink back?
16 Can you sustain yourself from the inside, when all else falls away?
17 Can you be alone with yourself?
18 do you truly like the company you keep in the empty moments?

if your answers to all of the above questions are ‘Yes’, congratulations! For all you 
know, cross-personal/cultural and spiritual intelligence are only a quantum apart.



The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

References

AC (2012). Coaching definitions. The Association for Coaching. At http://www.association 
forcoaching.com/about/about03.htm (accessed 4/8/2012).

Alban-Metcalfe, J. & Mead, G. (2010). Coaching for transactional and transformational leader-
ship. in J. Passmore (ed.), Leadership in coaching (pp. 211–28). London: Kogan Page.

Alban-Metcalfe, J. & Alimo-Metcalfe, B. (2007). The development of the private sector  version 
of the (engaging) Transformational Leadership Questionnaire (eLQ). Leadership & 
Organisational Development Journal, 28(2), 104–21.

Alimo-Metcalfe, B. & Alban Metcalfe, J. (2005). Leadership: Time for a new direction? 
Leadership, 1(1), 51–71.

Alli, A. (1977). Orientation: Principles, techniques, and philosophy of a ritual technology for 
 self-initiation. At http://www.paratheatrical.com (accessed 4/8/2012).

Alli, A. (2003). Towards an archaeology of the soul. Berkeley, CA: Vertical Pool Publishing.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Allport, G. W. (1961). Pattern and growth in personality. new York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Anderson, A. G., Knowles, Z. & Gilbourne, d. (2004). Reflective practice for sport psychol-

ogists: Concepts, models, practical implications on dissemination. The Sport Psychologist, 
18, 188–203.

Anderson, R. C., Spiro, R. J. & Anderson, M. C. (1978). Schemata as scaffolding for the repre-
sentation of information in connected discourse. American Educational Research Journal, 
15, 433–40.

Argyris, C. (1977). double loop learning in organizations. Harvard Business Review, 55(5), 
115–25.

Argyris, C. (1999). On organizational learning (2nd edn). oxford: Blackwell.
Argyris, C. & Schön, d. A. (1978). Organizational learning: A theory of action perspective. 

Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Arvedson, L. (1993). Coming to grips with learning organisations. European Forum for 

Management, 1, 5–10.
Ausbel, d. P. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive view. new York: Holt, Rinehart & 

Winston.

http://www.associationforcoaching.com/about/about03.htm
http://www.associationforcoaching.com/about/about03.htm
http://www.paratheatrical.com


238 References

Austin, e. J. (2008). A reaction time study of responses to trait and ability emotional intelli-
gence test items. Personality and Individual Differences, 36, 1855–64.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioural change. Psychological 
Review, 84, 195–215.

Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist, 37, 
122–47.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social–cognitive theory. 
englewood Cliffs, nJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. new York: W. H. Freeman.
Bargh, J. A., McKenna, K. Y. A. & Fitzsimons, G. M. (2002). Can you see the real me? 

Activation and expressions of the ‘true self ’ on the internet. Journal of Social Issues, 58(1), 
33–48.

Barnes, F. P. & Mudin, L. (eds) (2001). Values and ethics in the practice of psychotherapy and 
counselling. Buckingham: open University Press.

Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Bass, B. M. (1998). Transformational leadership: Industrial, military, and educational impact. 
Mahwah, nJ: Lawrence erlbaum.

Bass, B. M. & Riggio, R. e. (2005). Transformational leadership. Mahwah, nJ: Lawrence 
erlbaum.

Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking and adult development. norwood, nJ: Ablex.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind: Collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, 

 evolution and epistemology. Chicago, iL: University of Chicago Press.
Beck, A., Rush, A., Shaw, B. & emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. new York: 

Guilford Press.
Beisser, A. R. (1970). The paradoxical theory of change. in J. Fagan & i. L. Shepherd (eds), 

Gestalt therapy now (77–80). Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior Books. At www.gestalt.
org/arnie.htm (accessed 4/8/2012).

Belenky, M. F., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, M. R. & Tarule, J. M. (1986). Woman’s ways of 
knowing: The development of self, voice and mind. new York: Basic Books.

Bell, J. & Hardiman, R. (1989). The third role: The naturalistic knowledge engineer. in 
d. diaper (ed.), Knowledge elicitation: Principles, techniques and applications (49–85). 
Chichester: ellis Horwood.

Bennet, M. J. (1991). American cultural patterns: A cross-cultural perspective. new York: 
intercultural Press.

Blackler, F., Crump, n. & Mcdonald, S. (1999). organisational learning and organisa-
tional forgetting. in M. easterby-Smith, J. Burgoyne & L. Araujo (eds), Organisational 
learning and learning organisation: Development in theory and practice (194–216). 
London: Sage.

Bockler, J. (2006). Alchemy: Ritual expeditions into the psyche. Paper presented at the 10th 
Annual Conference of Transpersonal Psychology, the British Psychological Society.

Bor, R. & Legg, C. (2003). The systems paradigm. in R. Woolfe, W. dryden & S. Strawbridge 
(eds), Handbook of counselling psychology (2nd edn, 261–76). London: Sage.

Boud, d. (1995). Enhancing learning through self-assessment. London: Kogan Page.
Boud, d., Keogh, R. & Walker, d. (1985). Reflection: Turning experience into learning. 

London: Kogan Page.
BPS (2009). Code of ethics and conduct. Leicester: The British Psychological Society.
Bresser, F. (2006a). Best implementation of coaching in business: Part 1. Coach the Coach, 

20 (Fenman Professional Training resources at http://www.fenman.co.uk/; catalogue at 
http://www.fenman.co.uk/cat/view/Coach-the-Coach-complete.html).

http://www.gestalt.org/arnie.htm
http://www.gestalt.org/arnie.htm
http://www.fenman.co.uk/;
http://www.fenman.co.uk/cat/view/Coach-the-Coach-complete.html


 References 239

Bresser, F. (2006b). Best implementation of coaching in business: Part 2. Coach the Coach, 
21 (Fenman Professional Training resources at http://www.fenman.co.uk/; catalogue at 
http://www.fenman.co.uk/cat/view/Coach-the-Coach-complete.html).

Brookfield, S. d. (1991). Developing critical thinking: Challenging adults to explore alternative 
ways of thinking and acting. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Bruner, J. S. (1964). The course of cognitive growth. American Psychologist, 19, 1–15.
Brunner, J. (1986). Actual mind, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. new York: Harper & Row.
Buss, d. & Barnes, M. (1986). Preferences in human mate selection. Journal of Personality and 

Social Psychology, 50, 559–70.
Byrne, d. & nelson, d. (1965). Attraction and linear function of positive reinforcements. 

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 659–63.
Campone, F. (2011). The reflective coaching practitioner model. in J. Passmore (ed.), 

Supervision in coaching (11–30). London: Kogan Page.
Cangelosi, V. & dill, W. R. (1965). organisational learning: observations toward a theory. 

Administrative Science Quarterly, 10(2), 175–203.
Cannon-Bowers, J. A. & Salas, e. (1993). Reflections on shared cognition. Journal of 

Organizational Behaviour, 22, 195–202.
Carroll, M. (2006). Key issues in coaching psychology supervision. Coaching Psychologist, 

2(1), 4–8.
Casida, J. M. (2007). The relationship of nurse managers’ leadership styles and nursing unit 

organizational culture in acute care hospitals in new Jersey. Phd dissertation, Seton Hall 
University, new Jersey.

Cavanagh, M. & Lane, d. (2012a). Coaching psychology coming of age: The challenges we 
face in the messy world of complexity. International Coaching Psychology Review, 
7(1), 75–89.

Cavanagh, M. & Lane, d. (2012b). Coaching psychology coming of age: A response to our 
discussants. International Coaching Psychology Review, 7(1), 127–9.

Chambless, d. L. (1988). empirically validated treatment. in G. P. Koocher, J. C. norcross &  
S. S. Hill (eds), Psychologists’ desk reference (209–19). new York: oxford University 
Press.

Chaplain, R. (2003). Teaching without disruption. Vol. 1: A model for managing pupil behav-
iour in the secondary school. oxford: RoutledgeFalmer.

Chattopadhyay, P., Glick, W. H., Miller, C. C. & Huber, G. P. (1999). determininants of 
executive beliefs: Comparing functional conditioning and social influence. Strategic 
Management Journal, 20, 763–89.

Child, R., Woods, M., Willcock, d. & Man, A. (2011). Action learning supervision for coaches. 
in J. Passmore (ed.), Supervision in coaching (31–44). London: Kogan Page.

CiPd (2012). Coaching and mentoring. At http://www.cipd.co.uk/hr-topics/coaching-
mentoring.aspx#informationpage (accessed 4/8/2012).

Clore, G. L. & Byrne d. (1974). A reinforcement model of attraction. in T. L. Huston (ed.), 
Foundations of interpersonal attraction (143–70). new York: Academic Press.

Clutterbuck, d. (2004). Everyone needs a mentor (4th edn). London: CiPd [Chartered 
institute of Personnel and development].

Clutterbuck, d. & Megginson, d. (2005). Creating a coaching culture. London: CiPd.
CMi (2012). Level 3 qualifications in coaching and mentoring (QCF). At http://www. 

managers.org.uk/training-development-qualifications/personal-development/qualifications/
level-3-qualifications-coach (accessed 5/4/2013).

Collins, A. M. & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from semantic memory. Journal of 
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 8, 240–7.

http://www.fenman.co.uk/;
http://www.fenman.co.uk/cat/view/Coach-the-Coach-complete.html
http://www.cipd.co.uk/hr-topics/coaching-mentoring.aspx#Informationpage
http://www.cipd.co.uk/hr-topics/coaching-mentoring.aspx#Informationpage
http://www.managers.org.uk/training-development-qualifications/personal-development/qualifications/level-3-qualifications-coach
http://www.managers.org.uk/training-development-qualifications/personal-development/qualifications/level-3-qualifications-coach
http://www.managers.org.uk/training-development-qualifications/personal-development/qualifications/level-3-qualifications-coach


240 References

Combrink, A., Maree, J. & Mabolo, M. (2006). Breaking the silence: Stories as tool for healing 
in marginalized communities. Paper presented at the international narrative Therapy 
Festive Conference, 1–3 March, dulwich Centre, Adelaide Australia.

Contino, d. S. (2004). Leadership competencies: Knowledge, skills, and aptitudes: nurses 
need to lead organizations effectively. Critical Care Nurse, 24(3), 52–64.

Cranton, P. (1996). Professional development as tranformative learning. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. new York: Harper 
Perennial.

Cyert, R. M. & March, J. G. (1963). A behavioural theory of the firm. englewood Cliffs, nJ: 
Prentice Hall.

daloz, L. (1999). Mentor: Guiding the journey of adult learners. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
downey, M. (1999). Effective coaching. London: orion Business Books.
drake, d. B. (2006). narrative coaching: The foundation and framework for a story-based practice. 

Paper presented at the narrative Matters international Conference, Wolfville, nova Scotia.
drake, d. B. (2007). The art of thinking narratively: implications for coaching psychology and 

practice. Australian Psychologist, 42(4), 283–94.
drake, d. B. (2008a). Finding our way home: Coaching’s search for identity in a new era. 

Coaching: An International Journal of Theory, Research and Practice, 1(1), 15–26.
drake, d. B. (2008b). Thrice upon a time: narrative structure and psychology as a platform 

for coaching. in d. B. drake, d. Brennan & K. Gørtz (eds.), The philosophy and practice of 
coaching: Issues and insights for a new era (51–71). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

drake, d. B. (2009). narrative coaching. in e. Cox, T. Bachkirova & d. Clutterbuck (eds), 
The Sage handbook of coaching (120–31). London: Sage.

drake, d. B. (2012). Anxiety and complexity in a postprofessional era: The challenge of 
practising what we preach. International Coaching Psychology Review, 7(1), 106–8.

driscoll, M. P. (2005). Psychology of learning for instruction. new York: Pearson education.
duncan, R. & Weiss, A. (1979). organizational learning: implications for organizational 

design. in B. Staw (ed.), Research in organizational behaviour. Greenwich, CT: JAi Press.
ebbinghaus, H. (1913). Memory: A contribution to experimental psychology [1885]. new York: 

Columbia University, Teachers College Press.
ekblom, P., Law, H. C. & Sutton, M. (1996). Domestic burglary schemes in the Safer Cities 

Programme (Home office RSd Research Findings no. 42). London: Home office.
elsbree, L. (1982). The rituals of life: Pattern in narrative. new York: Kennikat.
eMCC (2011). Code of conduct: For coaching and mentoring. eMCC, June. At http://www.

emccouncil.org/src/ultimo/models/download/102.pdf (accessed 4/8/2012).
eyerman, R. & Jamison, A. (1991). Social movements: A cognitive approach. University Park: 

Pennsylvania State Press.
Festinger, V., Schachter, S. & Back, K. W. (1950). Social pressures in informal groups: A study of 

human factors in housing. new York: Harper.
Fiol, C. M. & Lyles, M. A. (1985). organizational learning. Academy of Management Review, 

10, 803–13.
Fitzsimmons, G. & Guise, S. (2010). Coaching for leadership style. in J. Passmore (ed.), 

Leadership coaching (229–44). London: Kogan Page.
Fowers, B. J. & Richardson, F. C. (1996). Why is multiculturalism good? American Psychologist, 

51, 609–21.
Freire, P. (1992). Politics of education. Greenwich, CT: Brunner/Mazel.
Gale, J. e. (1992). Conversation analysis of therapeutic discourse: The pursuit of a therapeutic 

agenda (Advances in discourse Processes 41). norwood, nJ: Ablex.
Gale, J. e. & newfield, n. (1992). A conversation analysis of a solution-focused marital therapy 

session. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 18, 163–5.

http://www.emccouncil.org/src/ultimo/models/Download/102.pdf
http://www.emccouncil.org/src/ultimo/models/Download/102.pdf


 References 241

Gallwey, T. (2000). The inner game of work. new York: Random House.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. new York: Basic 

Books.
Garvey, B. (2011). A very short, fairly interesting and reasonably cheap book about coaching and 

mentoring. London: Sage.
Garvey, R. & Garrett, H. R. (2005). The benefits of mentoring: Literature review. Paper pre-

sented at the east Mentoring Forum, February, Coaching and Mentoring Research Unit, 
Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield.

Garvin, d. A. (1993). Building a learning organisation. Harvard Business Review, 71(4), 78–84.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. new York: Basic Books.
Geertz, C. (1986). Anti-anti-relativism. American Anthropologist, 86, 263–78.
Gibb, G. (1988). Learning by doing: A guide to teaching and learning methods. oxford: oxford 

Brookes University, Further education Unit.
Gilbourne, d, (2006). Reflecting on the reflections of others: Support and critique. Sport and 

Exercise Psychology Review, 2(2), 49-54.
Gillie, M. (2009). I and thou. new York: Scribner.
Ginsberg, A. (1990). Constructing the business portfolio: A cognitive model of diversification. 

Journal of Management Studies, 26, 417–38.
Goleman, d. (1995). Emotional intelligence, why it can matter more than IQ. London: 

Bloomsbury.
Goleman, d. (1998). Working with emotional intelligence. London: Bloomsbury.
Goleman, d., Boyatzis, R. e. & McKee, A. (2003). The new leaders: Transforming the art of 

leadership. London: Sphere.
Grant, A. & Palmer, S. (2002). Coaching psychology. Workshop and meeting held at the 

Annual Conference of the division of Counselling Psychology, British Psychological 
Society, Torquay, 18 May.

Greenberger, d. & Padesky, C. A. (1995). Mind over mood: Change how you feel by changing the 
way you think. new York: Guilford Press.

Grindel, C. G. (2003). Mentoring managers. Nephrology Nursing Journal, 30(5), 517–22.
Haberman, J. (1971). Knowledge and human interest. London: Heinemann.
Hall, e. T. (1963). The silent language. Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Publications.
Hall, e. T. (1976). Beyond culture. Garden City, nY: Anchor Press.
Hall, L. (ed.) (2006a). news: Sort it with a story from down under. Coaching at Work, 1(2), 8.
Hall, L. (ed.) (2006b). UKAeA turns to coaching to power change. Coaching at Work, 1(2), 10.
Hall, L. (ed.) (2006c). The e word. Coaching at Work, 1(2), 22–5.
Hamel, G. (1996). Strategy as revolution. Harvard Business Review, July–August. At 

http://89.145.77.23/~crosshea/groupcreative/wp-content/uploads/Strategy-as-
revolution-Gary-Hamel.pdf (accessed 27/4/2013).

Handy, C. B. (1989). The age of unreason. London: Business Books.
Hanson, P. C. (1973). The Johari Window: A model for soliciting and giving feedback. in 

J. Jones & J. W. Pfeiffer (eds), The 1973 Annual Handbook for Group Facilitators  (114–119). 
LaJolla, CA: University Associates.

Hardingham, A., Brearley, M., Moorhouse, A. & Venter, B. (eds) (2004). The coach’s coach: 
Personal development for personal developers. London: CiPd.

Hartley, J., Whomsley, S. & Clarke, i. (2006). Transpersonal encounter: honouring  
people’s stories as a route to recovery. The Transpersonal Psychology Review, 10(1), 
93–101.

Hartman, S. & Crow, S. (2002). executive development in healthcare during times of turbu-
lence. Journal of Management in Medicine, 16(5), 359–70.

Hawkins, P. & Smith, n. (2006). Coaching, mentoring and organizational consultancy: 
Supervision and development. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.

http://89.145.77.23/~crosshea/groupcreative/wp-content/uploads/Strategy-as-revolution-Gary-Hamel.pdf
http://89.145.77.23/~crosshea/groupcreative/wp-content/uploads/Strategy-as-revolution-Gary-Hamel.pdf


242 References

Hefferon, K. & Boniwell, i. (2011). Positive psychology: Theory, research and applications. London: 
McGraw-Hill.

Hergenhan, B. R. H. & olson, M. H.(1997). An introduction to theories of learning. Cambridge: 
Pearson.

Heron, J. (1981a). experiential research methodology. in P. Reason & J. Rowan (eds), Human 
enquiry: A sourcebook of new paradigm research (153–66). Chichester: John Wiley.

Heron, J. (1981b). Philosophical basis for a new paradigm. in P. Reason & J. Rowan (eds), 
Human enquiry: A sourcebook of new paradigm research (19–36). Chichester: John 
Wiley.

Higgins, J. (2005). oil change. Director (december), 46–9.
Hill, d. & Jones, C. (eds) (2003). Forms of ethical thinking in therapeutic practice. Buckingham: 

open University Press.
Hilpern, K. (2006). driving force. Coaching at Work, 1(2), 30–1.
HMSo (1997). Green book: Appraisal and evaluation in central government. London: 

Stationary office.
Hodgkinson, G. P. & Sparrow, P. R. (2002). The competent organisation. Buckingham: open 

University Press.
Hofstede, G. H. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related values. 

Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. H. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London: McGraw-

Hill. (Republished by McGraw-Hill in new York in 1997 and 2004.)
Hounsell, d. (1984). Understanding teaching and teaching understanding. in F. Marton, d. 

Hounsell & n. entwistle (eds), The experience of learning (238–57). edinburgh: Scottish 
Academic Press.

Houston J. (1998). A passion for the possible. London: Thorsons.
Huber, G. P. (1991). organizational learning: The contributing process and the literatures. 

Organization Science, 2(1), 88–115.
Humphrey, S. & Holland, S. (2006). A chemistry lesson. Coaching at Work, 1(2), 22–5.
Hunt, K. (2005) e-mentoring: solving the issue of mentoring across distances. Development 

and Learning in Organizations, 19(5), 7–10.
iCF (2013). At www.coachfederation.org/ (accessed 22/4/2013).
iCF & PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012). ICF global coaching study: Executive summary. At 

http://www.coachfederation.org/coachingstudy2012/ (accessed 10/6/2012).
ireland, S., Hussain, Z. & Law, H. C. (2006). The perfect matchmaker: CiPd. Coaching at 

Work, 1(2), 26–9.
Jahoda, M. (1958). Current concepts of positive mental health. new York: Basic Books.
James, W. (1960). The variety of religious experience: A study of human nature [1902]. London: 

Fontana.
Jarvis, P. (1987). Meaningful and meaningless experience: Towards an analysis of learning from 

life. Adult Education Quarterly, 37(3), 164–72.
Jarvis, P. (1992). Paradox of learning: On becoming an individual in society. San Francisco, CA: 

Jossey-Bass.
Johnson, G. & Scholes, K. (1999). Exploring corporate strategy: Text and cases (5th edn). 

London: Prentice Hall.
Johnson-Laird, P. n. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jørgensen, i. S. & nafstad, H. e. (2004). Positive psychology: Historical, philosophical and 

epistemological perspectives. in P. A. Linley & S. Joseph (eds.), Positive psychology in prac-
tice (15–34). Hoboken, nJ: Wiley.

Jung, C. (1933). Modern man in search of a soul. new York: Harcourt, Brace, & World.
Kadushin, A. (1992). What’s wrong, what’s right with social work supervision. The Clinical 

Supervisor, 10(1), 3–19.

http://www.coachfederation.org/
http://www.coachfederation.org/coachingstudy2012/


 References 243

Kauffman, C. & Scouler, A. (2004). Toward a positive psychology of executive coaching. 
in P. A. Linley & S. Joseph (eds), Positive psychology in practice (287–302). Hoboken, 
nJ: Wiley.

Kegan, R. (1982). The evolving self: Problem and process in human development. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.

Kegan, R. (1994). In over our head: The mental demands of modern life. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.

Keller, J. M. (1984). The use of the ARCS model of motivation in teacher training. in K. e. 
Shaw (ed.), Aspects of educational technology. Vol. 17: Staff development and career updat-
ing (140–5). new York: nichols.

Kessels, J. W. M. (1996). Knowledge productivity and the corporate curriculum. in 
J.  F.  Schreinemakers (ed.), Knowledge management: Organization, competence and 
 methodology. Proceedings of 4th international ISMICK symposium, 21–2 october (168–73). 
Rotterdam: ergon.

Kiesler, S., Siegel, J. & McGuire, T. W. (1984). Social psychological aspects of computer-
mediated communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123–34.

Kirkpatrick, d. (1994). Evaluating training programs: The four levels [1959]. San Francisco, 
CA: Berrett-Koehler.

Koffka, K. (1935). The principles of gestalt psychology. Princeton, nJ: Brace and World.
Kogan, M. (1998). The politics of making meaning: discourse analysis of a ‘postmodern’ inter-

view. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 20, 229–51.
Kogan, S. M. & Gale, J. e. (1997). decentering therapy: Textual analysis of a narrative therapy 

session. Family Process, 36, 101–26.
Kohlberg, L. (1981). The philosophy of modern development. Moral stage and the idea of justice. 

new York: Harper & Row.
Kolb, d. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. 

englewood Cliffs, nJ: Prentice Hall.
Kondo, d. (1990). Crafting selves: Power, gender and discourses of identity in a Japanese work-

place (9, 11–24). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Koskela, L. (1992). Application of the new production philosophy in construction (Technical 

Report no. 72). Stanford, CA: Stanford University, Center for integrated Facility 
engineering (CFiFe).

Kram, K. e. & Hall, d. T. (1996). Mentoring in the context of diversity and turbulence. in 
e. e. Kossek & S. A. Lobel (eds), Managing human resource strategies for transforming the 
workplace (108–36). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Business.

Krause, i.-B. (1998). Therapy across culture. London: Sage.
Lane, d. (2005). Building a model for coaching psychology practice. Workshop held at the 

Second national Conference of the Special Group in Coaching Psychology in the UK, 
British Psychological Society.

Lave, J. & Wenger, e. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Law, H. C. (2002). Coaching psychology interest group: An introduction. The Occupational 
Psychologist, 47, 31–2.

Law, H. C. (2003). Applying psychology in executive coaching programmes for organisations. 
The Occupational Psychologist, 49, 12–19.

Law, H. C. (2004a). Arts of healing across cultures: dissertation on intercultural therapy. 
Postgraduate certificate dissertation, Goldsmiths, University of London.

Law, H. C. (2004b). Transcultural aspects of healing. Transpersonal Psychology Review, 8(2), 
46–54.

Law, H. C. (2005a). The role of ethical principles in coaching psychology. Coaching Psychologist, 
1(1), 19–20.



244 References

Law, H. C. (2005b). The new code of ethics, human rights, and coaching psychology. Coaching 
Psychologist, 1(2), 13–15.

Law, H. C. (2006a). ethical principles in coaching psychology. Coaching Psychologist, 2(1), 
13–16.

Law, H. C. (2006b). Can coaches be good in any context? Coaching at Work, 1(2), 14.
Law, H. C. (2011). What are the striking parallels between cognitive neuroscience and spiritual 

traditions? or why counselling psychologists should embrace transpersonal psychology. 
dr Ho Law in conversation with Professor Les Lancaster. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 
24(4), 331–9.

Law, H. C. (2012). The application of mindfulness, Counselling Psychology Quarterly. doi: 
10.1080/09515070.2012.708476

Law, H. C. (2013). Coaching psychology: A practitioner’s manual. Chichester: Wiley.
Law, H. C. & Fitzgerald, R. (2012). Coaching psychology in education: evaluation of coach 

training in Bahrain. in SGCP annual conference 2012: Putting coaching psychology into 
 practice: An evidence based approach (unpublished). Aston University, Birmingham. 
(Abstract at http://abstracts.bps.org.uk/index.cfm?&ResultsType=Abstracts&Result
Set_id=8977&FormdisplayMode=view&frmShowSelected=true&localAction=details, 
accessed 27/4/2013.)

Law, H. C., Aga, S. & Hill, J. (2006). Creating a ‘camp fire’ at home: narrative coaching: 
Community coaching and mentoring network conference report and reflection. The 
Cutting Edge (e-journal, iSSn 1366-8005), 7(1), 1–2.

Law, H. C., ireland, S. & Hussain, Z. (2005). evaluation of coaching competence self-review 
on-line tool within an nHS leadership development programme. Paper presented at 
the SGCP annual conference, december. British Psychological Society / City University, 
London.

Law, H. C., ireland, S. & Hussain, Z. (2006). evaluation of the coaching competence self-
review on-line tool within an nHS leadership development programme. International 
Coaching Psychology Review, 1(2), 56–67.

Law, H. C., ireland, S. & Hussain, Z. (2007). Psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning. 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

Law, H. C., Laulusa, L. & Cheng G. (2009). When Far east meets West: Seeking cultural 
synthesis through coaching. in Michel Moral & Geoffrey Abbott (eds), The Routledge 
companion to international business coaching (241–55). east Sussex: Routledge.

Lee, H., Spiers, J. A., Yurtseven, o., Cummings, G. G., Showlow, J., Bhatti, A. & Germann, 
P. (2010). impact of leadership development on emotional health in healthcare managers. 
Journal of Nursing Management, 18(8), 1027–39.

Lee, S. M. & Roberts, S. (2010). Sequential dynamic classification using latent variable models. 
The Computer Journal. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/bxp127

Leonard, n. H., Scholl, R. W. & Kowalski, B. (1999). information processing style and 
decision making. Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 20, 407–20. Chichester: John 
Wiley & Sons.

Levi-Strauss, C. (1966). The savage mind. London: Weidenfeld & nicolson.
Levinson, d. J. (1997). The season of a woman’s life. new York: Ballantine Books.
Levinson, d. J., darrow, d. n., Klein, e. B., Levinson, M. H. & McKee, B. (1978). The season 

of a man’s life. new York: Knopf.
Levitt, B. & March, J. G. (1988). organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 14, 

319–40.
Lincoln, Y. S. & Guba, e. G. (1984). Naturalistic enquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Linley, P. A. (2004). Coaching psychology: The positive psychology foundations. Paper presented 

at the international Positive Psychology Summit, october. Washington, dC.

http://abstracts.bps.org.uk/index.cfm?&ResultsType=Abstracts&ResultSet_ID=8977&FormDisplayMode=view&frmShowSelected=true&localAction=details
http://abstracts.bps.org.uk/index.cfm?&ResultsType=Abstracts&ResultSet_ID=8977&FormDisplayMode=view&frmShowSelected=true&localAction=details


 References 245

Linley, P. A. & Harrington, S. (2005). Positive psychology and coaching psychology: 
Perspectives on integration. The Coaching Psychologist, 1 (July), 13–14.

Linley, P. A. & Harrington, S. (2006). Strengths coaching: A potential-guided approach to 
coaching psychology. International Coaching Psychology Review, 1, 37–46.

Linley, P. A. & Joseph, S. (2004a). Applied positive psychology: A new perspective for 
professional practice. in P. A. Linley & S. Joseph (eds), Positive psychology in practice 
 (3–12). Hoboken, nJ: Wiley.

Linley, P. A. & Joseph, S. (eds) (2004b). Positive psychology in practice. Hoboken, nJ: Wiley.
Lioukas, S. & Chambers, d. (1998). Strategic decision-making process: The role of management 

and context. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 39–58.
Lipman-Blumen, J. (1996). Connective leadership: Managing in a changing world. New York: Oxford 

University Press
Locke, e. A., Shaw, K. n., Saari, L. M. & Latham, G. P. (1981). Goal setting and task 

performance: 1969–1980. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 125–52.
Loevinger, J. & Blasi, A. (1976). Ego development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Luft, J. (1970). Group processes: An introduction to group dynamics (2nd edn). Palo Alto, CA: 

national Press Books.
Madison, J. (1994). The value of mentoring in nursing leadership: A descriptive study. Nursing 

Forum, 29(4), 16–23.
Magee, W. (2006). Two heads, one mind. Director. At http://www.director.co.uk/

MAGAZine/2006/11%20nov/mentoring_60_4.html (accessed 24/4/2013).
Magerman, M. H. & Leahy, M. J. (2009). The lone ranger is dying: Gestalt coaching as support 

and challenge. International Gestalt Journal, 32(1), 173–96.
Marienau, C. (1999). Self-assessment at work: outcome of adult reflections on practice. Adult 

Education Quarterly, 49(3), 135–46.
Markoczy, L. (1997). Measuring beliefs: Accept no substitutes. Academy of Management 

Journal, 40, 1228–42.
Maslow A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. new York: Harper & Row.
Maslow, A. H. (1968). Toward a psychology of being (2nd edn). new York: Van nostrand Reinhold.
Mathena, K. A. (2002). nursing manager leadership skills. Journal of Nursing Administration, 

32, 136–42.
Mayer, J. d. & Salovey, P. (1993). The intelligence of emotional intelligence. Intelligence, 22, 

89–113.
Mayer, J. d. & Salovey, P. (1997). What is emotional intelligence? in P. Salovey & d. Sluyter 

(eds), Emotional development and emotional intelligence (3–31). new York: Basic Books.
Mayer , J. d., diPaolo, M. T. & Salovey, P. (1990). Perceiving affective content in ambiguous visual 

stimuli: A component of emotional intelligence. Journal of Personality Assessment, 54, 772–81.
McAlearney, A. S. (2006). Leadership development in healthcare: A qualitative study. Journal 

of Organizational Behavior, 27, 967–82.
McGoven, J., Lindemann, M., Vergara, M., Murphy, S., Barker, L. & Warrenfeltz, R. (2001). 

Maximising the impact of executive coaching. Manchester Review, 6(1), 1–32.
McKenna, d. & davis, S. (2009). Hidden in plain sight. Industrial and organizational 

 psychology: An exchange of perspectives on science and practice, 3(2), 244–60.
Megginson, d. & Clutterbuck, d. (1995). Techniques for coaching and mentoring. oxford: 

elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
Megginson, d., Stokes, P. & Garrett-Harris, R. (2003). Passport to export mentoring pilot 

scheme: east Midlands. An evaluation report on behalf of trade partners UK (1–3). 
Sheffield: MRCU Sheffield Hallam University.

Melnick, J. & nevis, S. (2005). Gestalt methodology. in A. Woldt and S. Toman (eds), Gestalt 
therapy: History, theory and practice (101–14). Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.

http://www.director.co.uk/MAGAZINE/2006/11%20Nov/mentoring_60_4.html
http://www.director.co.uk/MAGAZINE/2006/11%20Nov/mentoring_60_4.html


246 References

Mentkowski, M. (2000). Learning that lasts: Integrating learning, development and performance 
in college and beyond. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Merriam, S. (1994). Learning and life experience: The connection in adulthood. in J. Sinnott 
(ed.), Interdisciplinary handbook of adult learning (74–89). Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press.

Merton, R. K. (1948). The self-fulfilling prophecy. Antioch Review, 8, 193–210.
Mezirow, J. (1990). Fostering critical reflection in adulthood: A guide to transformative and 

emancipatory learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning. San Francisco, CA: 

Jossey-Bass.
Mezirow, J. (1996). Contemporary paradigms of learning. Adult Education Quarterly, 44(3), 

158–73.
Mezirow, J. (2000). Learning as transformation: Critical perspectives on a theory in progress. San 

Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Mikolajczak, M., Luminet, o., Leroy, C. & Roy, e. (2007). Psychometric properties of the 

Trait emotional intelligence Questionnaire. Journal of Personality Assessment, 88, 338–53.
Miller, C. C., Burke, L. M. & Glick, W. H. (1998) Cognitive diversity among upper-echelon 

executives: implications for strategic decision process. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 
39–58.

Mintzberg, H. (1994). The fall and rise of strategic planning. Harvard Business Review (January). 
At http://hbr.org/1994/01/the-fall-and-rise-of-strategic-planning/ar/1 (accessed 
27/4/2013).

Mohammed, S., Klimoski, R. & Rentsch, J. (2000). The measurement of team mental models: 
We have no shared schema. Organisational Research Methods, 3, 123–65.

Moreland, R. L. (2000). Transactive memory: Learning who knows what in work groups and 
organisations. in L. Thompson, d. Messick & J. Levine (eds), Shared cognition in organi-
sations: The management of knowledge (3–31). Hillsdale, nJ: Lawrence erlbaum.

Murray, A. (1989). Top management group heterogeneity and firm performance. Strategic 
Management Journal, 10, 125–41.

Myerhoff, B. (1980). Number our days. new York: Simon & Schuster.
Myerhoff, B. (1982). Life history among the elderly: Performance, visibility and re-membering. 

in J. Ruby (ed.), A crack in the mirror: Reflexive perspectives in anthropology (99–120). 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Myerhoff, B. (1986). Life not death in Venice: its second life. in V. Turner & e. Brunner (eds), 
The anthology of experience (261–86). Chicago: University of illinois Press.

Myers, i. B. (1962). The Myers Briggs type indicator. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists 
Press.

naranjo, C. (1993). Gestalt therapy: The attitude and practice of an atheoretical experientialism. 
Carmarthen, Wales: Crown House Publishing.

neenan, M. & Palmer, S. (2001). Cognitive behavioural coaching. Stress News, 13(3), 15–18.
nonaka, i. (1991). The knowledge-creating company. Harvard Business Review, november–

december, 96–104.
nonaka, i., Takeuchi, H. & Umemoto, K. (1996). A theory of organisational knowledge 

creation. International Journal of Technology Management, 11(7–8): 833–45.
norman, d. A. (1983). Some observations on mental models. in d. Gentner & A. L. Stevens 

(eds), Mental models (7–14). Hillsdale, nJ: Lawrence erlbaum.
Palmer, S. & Whybrow, A. (2004). Coaching psychology survey: Taking stock. Paper presented 

at the BPS SGCP inaugural Conference, 15 december, City University, London.
Palmer, S. & Whybrow, A. (2006). The coaching psychology movement and its development 

within the British Psychological Society. International Coaching Psychology Review, 1(1), 
56–70.

http://hbr.org/1994/01/the-fall-and-rise-of-strategic-planning/ar/1


 References 247

Palmer, S. & Whybrow, A. (2007). The handbook of coaching psycholohy. Hove, Sussex: 
Routledge.

Parks, M. R. & Floyd, K. (1996). Making friends in cyberspace. Journal of communication, 
46, 80–96.

Parsloe, e. (1995). Coaching, mentoring and assessing: A practical guide to developing compe-
tence [1992]. new York: Kogan Page.

Pask R. & Joy, B. (2007), Mentoring–coaching: A handbook for education professionals. Milton 
Keynes: open University Press.

Passmore, J. (ed.) (2011). Supervision in coaching. London: Kogan Page.
Patterson, M., Wilcox, S. & Higgs, J. (2006). exploring dimensions of artistry in reflective 

practice. Reflective Practice, 7(4), 455–68.
Pedlar, M. M., Burgoyne, J. & Boydel, T. (1991). The learning company: A strategy for sustain-

able development. London. McGraw-Hill.
Perls, F. S. (1969). Gestalt therapy verbatim. Utah: Real People Press.
Perls, F. S. (1973). The Gestalt approach and eye witness to therapy. Palo Alto, CA: Science and 

Behaviour Book.
Perry, W. G. (1970). Cognitive and ethical growth: The making of meaning. in  

A. W. Chickering (ed.), The modern American college (76–116). San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.

Peterson, d. B. (2009). Book review. Coaching: An International Journal of Theory, Research 
and Practice, 2(1), 89.

Peterson, C. & Seligman, M. e. P. (2004). Character strengths and virtues: A handbook and 
classification. new York: oxford University Press.

Petrides, K. V. & Furnham, A. (2001). Trait emotional intelligence: Psychometric investigation with 
reference to established trait taxonomies. European Journal of Personality, 15, 425–48.

Petrides, K. V., Frederickson, n. & Furnham, A. (2004). The role of trait emotional intelligence 
in academic performance and deviant behaviour at school. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 36, 277–93.

Petrides, K. V., Furnham, A. & Frederickson, n. (2004). emotional intelligence. The 
Psychologist, 17(10), 574–7.

Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. new York: Basic Books.
Porter, M. (1996). What is strategy? Harvard Business Review (november–december), 61–78. 

At http://www.ipocongress.ru/download/guide/article/what_is_strategy.pdf (accessed 
28/4/2013).

Potter, G. (2012). Sacred paths entwine. St Albans: Academy Press.
Reason, P. (ed.) (1988). Human enquiry in action. Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.
Reason, P. & Rowan, J. (eds) (1981). Human enquiry: A sourcebook of new paradigm research. 

Chichester: John Wiley.
Rentsch, J. R. & Hall, R. J. (1994). Members of great teams think alike: A model of team effec-

tiveness and schema similarity among team members. Advances in Interdisciplinary Studies 
of Work Teams, 1, 223–61.

Roberts, J. (1994). Tales and transformations: Stories in families and family therapy. new York: 
norton.

Rogers, C. R. (1963). Toward a science of the person. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 3, 
79–92. (Reprinted in T. W. Wann (ed.), Behaviorism and phenomenology: Contrasting bases 
for modern psychology, Chicago, iL: University of Chicago Press, 1964.)

Rosenbaum, M. e. (1986). The repulsion hypothesis: on the nondevelopment of relation-
ships. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 50, 729–36.

Rosinski, P. (2003). Coaching across cultures, London: nicholas Brealey.
Rosinski, P. (2006). Cross cultural coaching. in J. Passmore (ed.), Excellence in coaching  

(153–69). London: Kogan Page.

http://www.ipocongress.ru/download/guide/article/what_is_strategy.pdf


248 References

Rothbaum, B. o., Mesdows, e. A., Resick, P. & Foy, d. W. (2000). Cognitive behavioural 
therapy. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 13, 558–63.

Rotter, J. B. (1956). Social learning and clinical psychology. englewood Cliffs, nJ: Prentice 
Hall.

Rowson, R. (2001). ethical principles. in F. P. Barnes & L. Mudin (eds), Values and ethics 
in the practice of psychotherapy and counselling (6–22). Buckingham: open University 
Press.

Rumelhart, d. e. (1980). Schemata: The building blocks of cognition. in R. J. Spiro, B. C. 
Bruce & W. F. Brewer (eds), Theoretical issues in reading comprehension (33–58). Hillsdale, 
nJ: Lawrence erlbaum.

Rumelhart, d. e. & norman, d. A. (1978). Accretion, tuning, and restructuring: Three modes 
of learning. in J. W. Cotton & R. L. Klatzky (eds), Semantic factors in cognition (37–53). 
Hillsdale, nJ: Lawrence erlbaum.

Rumelhart, d. e. & norman, d. A. (1981). Analogical processes in learning. in J. R. Anderson 
(ed.), Cognitive skills and their acquisition (335–59). Hillsdale, nJ: Lawrence erlbaum.

Rushall, B. S. (2003). Coaching development and the second law of thermodynamics [or 
belief-based versus evidence-based coaching development]. At http://coachsci.sdsu.edu/
csa/thermo/thermo.htm (accessed 15/5/2013).

Ryde, J. (2000). Supervising across difference. International Journal of Psychotherapy, 5(1), 
37–48.

Sackmann, S. A. (1991). Cultural knowledge in organisations: Exploring the collective mind. 
newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Sackmann, S. A. (1992). Culture and sub-cultures: An analysis of organisational knowledge. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 140–61.

Safran, J. d. (1990). Towards a refinement of cognitive therapy in light of interpersonal theory. 
Clinical Psychological Review, 10, 87–105.

Salovey, P. & Mayer, J. d. (1990). emotional intelligence. Imagination, Cognition and 
Personality, 9, 185–211.

Schön, d. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner. new York: Basic Books.
Schön, d. A. (1991). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. London: 

Ashgate.
Schwartz, S. (1994a). Theory of cultural values and some implications for work. Applied 

Psychology, 48(1), 23–47.
Schwartz, S. H. (1994b). Beyond individualism/collectivism: new dimensions of values. in 

U. Kim, H. C. Triandis, C. Kagitçiabasi, S. C. Choi & G. Yoon (eds), Individualism and 
collectivism: Theory, method and applications (85–119). newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Seligman, M. e. P. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. 
American Psychologist, 55, 5–14.

Senge, P. (1990). The fifth discipline: The art and practice of learning organisations. London: 
doubleday.

Shams, M. & Law, H. (2012). Peer coaching framework: An exploratory technique. The 
Coaching Psychologist, 8(1), 46–9.

Sheehy, G. (1976). Passages: Predictable crises of adult life. new York: Ballantine Books.
Sheehy, G. (1996). New passages. new York: Ballantine Books.
Simon, S. n. (2009). Applying gestalt theory to coaching. Gestalt Review, 13(3), 230–9.
Smith K. G., olian, J. d., Smith, K. A. & Flood, P. (1999). Top management team diver-

sity, group process and strategic consensus. Strategic management Journal, 20, 445–65. 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

Smith, L., Ciarrochi, J. & Heaven, P. C. L. (2008). The stability and change of trait emotional 
intelligence, conflict communication patterns, and relationship satisfaction: A one-year 
longitudinal study. Personality and Individual Differences, 45, 738–43.

http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/dept/coachsci/csa/thermo/thermo.htm
http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/dept/coachsci/csa/thermo/thermo.htm


 References 249

Snowden, d. & Boone, M. (2007). A leader’s framework for decision making. Harvard 
Business Review, 85(11), 68–76.

Solomon, H. M. (2000). The ethical self. in e. Christopher & H. M. Solomon (eds), Jungian 
thought in the modern world (191–216). London: Free Association.

Spence, G. B., Cavanagh, M. J. & Grant, A. M. (2006). duty of care in an unregulated industry: 
initial findings on the diversity and practices of Australian coaches. International Coaching 
Psychology Review, 1(1), 71–85.

Spinelli, e. (2006). Applying existential psychology in a coaching psychology practice: The 
question of conflict. Paper presented at the Second national Coaching Psychology 
Conference, 19–20 december, British Psychological Society.

Spreitzer, G. M. (1995). Psychological empowerment in the workplace: Construct definition, 
measurement and validation. Academy of Management Journal, 38(5), 1442–65.

Stacey, R. d. (1996). Strategic management and organisational dynamics: The challenge of 
 complexity (2nd edn). London: Financial Times.

Stacey, R. (2012). Comment on debate article: Coaching psychology coming of age: The 
 challenges we face in the messy world of complexity. International Coaching Psychology 
Review, 7(1), 91–5.

Staples, d. S., Greenaway, K. & McKeen, J. d. (2001). opportunities for research about 
managing the knowledge-based enterprise. International Journal of Management Review, 
3(1), 1–20.

Stelter, R. (2007). Coaching: A process of personal and social meaning making. International 
Coaching Psychology Review, 2(2), 191–201.

Stelter, R. (2009). Coaching as a reflective space in a society of growing diversity: Towards a 
narrative, postmodern paradigm. International Coaching Psychology Review, 4(2), 207–17.

Stelter, R. & Law, H. (2009). narrative coaching: Towards personal and social meaning-
making. Master class at the Second european Conference of Coaching Psychology, 
december, London.

Stelter, R. & Law, H. (2010). Coaching: narrative–collaborative practice. International 
Coaching Psychology Review, 5(2), 152–64.

Storey, J. (2010). Signs of change: ‘damned rascals’ and beyond. in J. Storey (ed.), Leadership 
in organizations: Current issues and key trends (2nd edn, 3–13). Abingdon: Routledge.

Strata, R. (1989). organisational learning: The key to management innovation. Sloan 
Management Review, 30, 63–74.

Strawson, M. (1996). in deep sympathy. Toward a natural history of virtue: Review of M. Ridley, 
The origin of virtue. Times Literary Supplement, 29 november, 3–4.

Sue, d. W. & Sue, d. (1990). Counselling the cultural difference. new York: Wiley.
Sutcliffe, K. M. & Huber, G. P. (1998). Firm and industry as determinants of executive 

 perspective perception. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 793–807.
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1990). To be adored or to be known: The interplay of self-enhancement and 

self-verification. in R. M. Sorrentino & e. T Higgins (eds), Handbook of motivation and 
cognition, vol. 2 (408–48). new York: Guildford Press.

Taylor, K., Marienau, C. & Fiddler, M. (2000). Developing adult learners: Strategies for teachers 
and trainers. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Thorndike, e. L. (1920). intelligence and its use. Harper’s Magazine, 140, 227–35.
Tichy, n. & devanna, M. A. (1986). Transformational leadership. new York: John Wiley & 

Sons.
Tidwell, L. C. & Walther, J. B. (2002). Computer-mediated communication effects on 

 disclosure, impressions, and interpersonal evaluations: Getting to know one another a bit 
at a time. Human Communication Research, 28, 317–48.

Trompenaars, F. & Hampden-Turner, C. (1997). Riding the waves of culture, 2nd edn. 
London: nicholas Brealey.



250 References

Turner, V. (1967). The forest of symbols: Aspects of Ndembu ritual. ithaca, nY: Cornel Paperbacks.
Turner V. & Brunner e. (eds) (1986). The anthology of experience. Chicago: University of 

illinois Press.
Vaill, P. (1996). Learning as a way of being: Strategies of how to survive in permanent white 

water. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
van nieuwerburgh, C. (2012). Coaching in education: Getting better results for students, educa-

tors and parents. London: Karnac Books.
Veitch, R. & Griffitt, W. (1976). Good news, bad news: Affective interpersonal effects. Journal 

of Applied Social Psychology, 6, 69–75.
Verity, P. (2006). Planning for growth. in A. Jolly (ed.), The growing business handbook  

(3–7). London: Kogan Page.
Vosniadou, S. & Brewer, W. F. (1987). Theories of knowledge restructuring in development. 

Review of Educational Research, 57, 51–67.
Vroom, V. (1964). Work and motivation. new York: Wiley.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language [1926]. Cambridge, MA: MiT Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society [1926]. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ward, P. (1997). 360-degree feedback. London: institute of Personnel and development.
Weick, K. e. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand oaks, CA: Sage.
Weick, K. e. & Roberts, K. H. (1993). Collective mind in organisation: Heedful interrelating 

on flight decks. Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, 357–81.
Weissman, A. (2008). Lesson learnt from enron: A lawyer’s perspective on business ethics. 

Keynote address at the ‘Real World Real People: Professional ethics Conference’, 1–3 July, 
Kingston University, Surrey, UK.

Wenger, e. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Wenger, e. (2009). Social learning capability: Four essays on innovation and learning in social 
systems. Social Innovation, Sociedade e Trabalho Booklets, 12 (supplement, MTSS/GeP & 
eQUAL Portugal, Lisbon).

Wenger, e. (2011). What is a community of practice? Posted by Team Be on 28 december 
in FAQ. At http://wenger-trayner.com/resources/what-is-a-community-of-practice/ 
(accessed 4/8/20012).

Wenger, e., Mcdermott, R. & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide 
to managing knowledge. Harvard, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Wenger, e., White, n. & Smith, J. d. (2009). Digital habitats: Stewarding technology for com-
munities. Portland, oR: CPsquare.

White, M. (1995a). Re-authoring lives: Interviews and essays. Adelaide, S. Australia: dulwich 
Centre Publications.

White, M. (1995b). Reflecting team-work as definitional ceremony. in M. White, Re-authoring 
lives: Interviews and essays. Adelaide, S. Australia: dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. (1997). definitional ceremony. in M. White, Narratives of therapists’ lives. Adelaide, 
S. Australia: dulwich Centre Publications.

White, M. (2000). Reflecting team-work as definitional ceremony revisited. in M. White, 
Reflections on narrative practice (59–85). Adelaide, S. Australia: dulwich Centre 
Publications.

White, M. (2006). narrative Therapy intensive Workshop, 20–24 February, Adelaide, S. Australia: 
dulwich Centre.

White, M. (2007). Maps of narrative practice. new York: norton.
Whiteley, P. (2006). Pioneering medicine. Coaching at Work, 1(2), 30–1.
Whitmore, J. (2002). Coaching for performance. London: nicholas Brealey.
Whybrow, A. (2008). Coaching psychology: Coming of age? International Coaching Psychology 

Review, 3(3), 227–40.

http://wenger-trayner.com/resources/what-is-a-community-of-practice/


 References 251

Whybrow, A. & Palmer, S. (2006). Shifting perspectives: one year into the development of 
the British Psychological Society Special Group in Psychology in the UK. International 
Coaching Psychology Review, 1(2), 75–85.

Wiersema, M. F. & Bantel, K. A. (1992). Top management team demography and corporate 
strategic change. Academy of Management Journal, 35, 91–121.

Willis, P. (2005). Standards research. Paper presented at the 12th european Mentoring and 
Coaching Conference, Zurich.

Wills, T. A. (1991). Social support and interpersonal relationships. in M. S. Clark (ed.), Review 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 26–89.

Winnicott, d. W. (1971). Playing and reality. new York: Basic Books.
Witkin, H. A. (1962). Psychological differentiation: Studies of development. new York: John 

Wiley & Sons.
Zack, M. (1999). Managing codified knowledge. Sloan Management Review, 40(4), 37–56.





The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

index

note: page numbers in italics refer to figures; those in bold to tables.

abstract conception, 33, 34
AC see Association for Coaching
ACT see adaptive control of thought model
acting/identification Gestalt techniques, 127–8
acting out, 170, 172–3
action/action plans, 204

case studies, 177–8, 181–2, 187–8, 190–5, 
197–8

CBT, 133, 158
CPd, 94
GRoW model, 143, 144, 145, 149
narrative coaching, 28, 135–6, 137,  

139, 194
reflective practice, 33, 34, 36, 93,  

155–6, 157
Vygotsky’s distancing tasks, 41, 134

adaptive control of thought (ACT) model, 43
Aga, S., 191
age, 39, 213
agreement/certainty matrix, 17–18
Alli, A., 169, 170, 171
Anderson, R.C., 43
appraisal/implementation

business case for coaching/mentoring 
programme, 77–8

RoAMeF evaluation framework, 204, 
206–7

appreciation, 109–10
ARCS model of motivational design, 31
articulation, 71, 72
association, principle of, 29
Association for Coaching (AC), 57,  

186–9, 227
Athena, 53, 54
Ausbel, d., 43
automatic thought, 130
axiomatic knowledge, 69, 70, 87

barriers to learning/change
adapting to the future, 47, 49, 51
CBT, 132–3
in coachee–coach matching, 220
corporate coaching/mentoring 

programmes, 79–80
identifying/overcoming exercise,  

156, 157
input analysis, 58
Kodak, 65
negative experiences, 27–8
self-fulfilling prophecy, 31

Bartlett, F.C., 43
befriending behaviour, 83
belief-based practice, ix
Bell, J., 72, 73



254 Index

BMe (black and ethnic minority) leadership 
project (case study), 176–81, 208–13, 
214, 215–16, 217

BPS see British Psychological Society
Bresser, F., 187, 188
British eclectic model, 149
British Psychological Society (BPS), Special 

Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP), 
2, 11–12, 58, 60, 92, 212, 227, 229

Bruner, J.S., 40
Buddhism, 100, 122
business consultancies, 13–14

campfire (Peterborough case study), 191
case studies

Community Coaching Café, 196–200
Maltese Healthcare leadership coaching 

programme, 181–6
Peterborough, narrative coaching in 

communities, 190–6
transatlantic e-coaching, 186–9
UK healthcare system, 176–81, 208–13, 

214, 215–16
Cavanagh, M., 17, 18, 19
CBA see cost–benefit analysis
CBT see cognitive behavioural techniques
CeA see cost-effectiveness analysis
certainty/agreement matrix, 17–18
chains of association, 41, 134
change, paradoxical theory of, 124–6
Chartered institute of Personnel and 

development (CiPd), 11, 55
Chartered Management institute (CMi), 11, 

13, 75
child development, 37–8, 40, 83
CiPd see Chartered institute of Personnel 

and development
classic conditioning, 29
clients, ethics/codes of conduct, 229–30, 

231, 232
Clutterbuck, d., 20, 149
CMi see Chartered Management institute
CMSi see cross-cultural coaching/mentoring 

and social intelligence model
coaching/mentoring

industry/market see industry
skills/competence, 21, 88–9, 156, 201, 

212, 214
terminology, 3, 4–5, 7, 53–8, 101

coaching psychology
coming of age, 16–19
defined, 59–60
see also learning theories

codes of conduct/practice, 229–33, 234
cognitive behavioural techniques (CBT), x, 

130–4, 143, 144, 150, 157–8, 220
collaborative learning

bridging collective/individual 
purpose, 147

coach–coachee relationship, 15, 40,  
130–1

community of practice, 42, 44, 45, 46, 
86–7, 154

group learning defined, 57
narrative coaching, 42, 140–1, 167–9, 

189–96
organizational learning, 64, 66, 82, 84–6
reinforcement affect model, 29–30
social support, 83–4

communication
cultural environment, 95, 97–8, 99
feedback mechanism, 92, 113–14
internet technology, 19, 20–1, 69
in organizations, 19, 66, 69, 70–1, 75, 82, 

183, 216
social competence, 61, 108, 111,  

185, 213
Community Coaching Café (case study), 

196–200
community learning

Community Coaching Café (case study), 
196–200

goals in matching matrix, 220
impact of registration requirements, 229
narrative coaching, 140–1, 189–96
of practice, 42, 44, 45, 46, 86–7, 154
social support, 83–4

complaints, 64, 82, 187–8
conclusion and recommendation, 36, 41, 93, 

134, 138, 139, 157
see also action/action plans

conditioned stimulus/response, 29
confidence/self-esteem, 83, 105, 133–4, 

155, 200, 214, 215
conflict resolution, 69, 108, 128–9, 224, 

231–3
Confucius, 53, 54
conscientiousness, 106, 111, 184



 Index 255

consciousness, landscape mapping (narrative 
coaching), 28, 136–9, 164, 194

see also externalizing conversations
constructive-developmental theories

individual meaning making, 42–4
Levinson’s life structure theory, 38–40
Piaget’s theory of child development, 

37–8
Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development, 

40–1, 42, 61, 134, 135
consultancies, 13–14
continuous professional development (CPd) 

cycle, 13, 92–5, 111, 153–5, 178,  
228, 229

control model of learning, 32–3
coordinators

attributes, 223
in case studies, 176, 177, 178, 187, 188, 

196, 199, 200
as matchmakers, 177, 178, 221–2
to promote evidence-based practice, 225

cost–benefit analysis (CBA), 206
cost-effectiveness analysis (CeA), 206
counselling, 12, 16, 88, 130, 230, 231
CPd see continuous professional 

development cycle
creativity

management iLA/learning, 184, 185
personal competence, 107, 111, 145,  

149, 171
positive psychology, 23, 25
and standardization, 227, 228

cross-cultural coaching/mentoring and social 
intelligence model (CMSi), 104 see also 
cultural and social competence self-
assessment questionnaire

cross-cultural practice
applicability of Western cultural values, 30, 

33, 39–40, 100, 102
ethics, 233–4
experience–competence link, 213
framework for, 22, 91 see also universal 

integrated framework (UiF)/integrative 
learning system (iLS)

spirituality, 149
terminology/definitions, 3, 60
see also case studies; diversity

CSC SAQ see cultural and social competence 
self-assessment questionnaire

Csikszentmihalyi, M., 23, 170, 193
cultural competence

adapting to, 49
allophilia, 224
case studies, 178–80, 186, 212,  

213, 217
CPd, 226
cultural-agility development, 145–7,  

149, 150
cultural environments, 92, 95–101
intercultural coaching psychology, 60
Levinson’s life structure theory,  

39–40
organizational, 15, 77, 81–2, 88, 89, 109, 

110, 111
pragmatic model, 103, 111
self-assessment questions, 109–12
sensitivity, 5 see also narrative coaching
spirituality, 149
structuring reflective logs, 156
UiF/development intention model, 113
Western cultural values, 30, 33, 39–40, 

100, 102
see also cross-cultural practice

cultural and social competence self-
assessment questionnaire  
(CSC SAQ), xv, 104–13, 155, 211–13, 
224–5, 226

daloz, L., 54
davis, S., 16–17
de-centred coaching posture, 142
decision-making, appraising coaching 

proposals, 18, 76, 206
definitional ceremonies, 140–1, 164,  

168–9, 189
description

narrative coaching, 136–7, 138, 139
organizational directory knowledge, 69
reflection, 36, 93, 155, 157
Vygotsky’s distancing tasks, 41, 134

development see constructive-developmental 
theories

development intention model, 112, 113
dictionary knowledge, 69, 70, 87
directory knowledge, 69, 70, 87
disillusionment story (Peterborough case 

study), 193
distance learning see e-coaching/mentoring



256 Index

diversity
champions/social artists, 51, 77, 109, 

110, 180
coach–coachee matching, 219–20,  

221, 223
future focus, 235
skills/competence, 5, 78, 88, 89, 109, 

110, 111
threat by standardization, 227, 228
top team, 73, 74
see also cross-cultural practice

double triad, 231–2
drake, d., 18, 19, 41
driscoll, M., 58, 59
dynamic learning model, 46–50, 92, 93, 113

ebbinghaus, H., 29, 42
e-coaching/mentoring, 14, 19–21, 154, 

186–9, 216
economic benefits/costs, 13, 15, 78
effect, law of, 29
ei see emotional intelligence
electronic mentoring matching, 222
embedded Figure Test, 76
eMCC see european Mentoring and 

Coaching Council
emotional intelligence (ei), 92, 102–3,  

104–10, 212, 217, 223–4, 226
empathy, 47, 50, 88, 107, 111, 154
employers see organizations/employers
empowerment

community, 82, 141, 164, 190, 192
management skill, 89, 107–8, 111, 183, 184

empty chair technique, 163–4
enactive representation, 40
enron, 64, 65
epistemological approach to learning, 28
esteem/confidence, 83, 105, 133–4, 155, 

200, 214, 215
ethics, 13, 229–35
ethnicity, 99–100, 110, 114, 211, 213, 214
european Mentoring and Coaching Council 

(eMCC), definitions of coaching/
mentoring, 54, 55, 56–7, 227

evaluation
case studies, 179–81, 185–6, 188–9,  

195–6, 198–9, 208–16
CBT, 131
generic methodology, 203–10

goal-based/appreciative, 30
re-authoring (narrative coaching), 134, 

138–9
RoAMeF framework, 207–10
UiF/iLS, 93–4, 199, 209, 210–13, 217, 

223, 225–6
evidence-based practice, ix–x, xi, xiii, 19, 67

see also evaluation
executive coaching/leadership training, 10, 

15, 57, 89, 131, 132, 150, 154
Malta leadership coaching programme 

(case study), 181–6
transatlantic e-coaching project (case 

study), 186–9
UK coaching and mentoring programme 

(case study), 176–81, 208–16
expectancy valence theory, 32
experimental approach to learning, 28, 29
explication/translation and Gestalt 

techniques, 127
explicit knowledge, 68, 71, 73, 87, 88
expressive Gestalt techniques, 126–7, 150
externalizing conversations, 136–7, 140, 

142, 144, 150
see also re-authoring

face-to-face with computer-mediated 
coaching/mentoring, 20–1

family influence, 96–7, 100, 147
feedback mechanism (UiF), 93, 113–14, 

136, 185, 211
field dependence, 76
flexibility, 105, 106–7, 111
fluidity of coach/coachee roles, 101, 210
friendship, 83
Furnham, A., 102, 110, 111, 112
future work, 235

Gallwey, T., 16, 56
gender, 213, 214
Gestalt therapy/coaching

approach to change, 124–6
background, 121–2
dos and don’ts, 129–30
focus on being/present, 123–4, 150
integration with GRoW, 143, 144
practical exercises, 158–64, 173
techniques/exercises, 126–30, 150, 

158–64



 Index 257

theory of learning, 29
transpersonal aspect, 122–3

Gibb, G., 36
global coaching survey (iCF), xi, 10
goal setting

as constraint, 30, 148
GRoW model revisited, 143–4
organizational, 69, 77, 84, 85
self-efficacy, 35
see also objectives

Goleman, d., 102, 103
Greenberger, d., 130
group coaching, 57, 82, 109, 161–2, 167–9, 

170, 171, 172
see also community learning

GRoW model, 99, 115, 117, 143–5, 153, 
182, 183

Haberman, J., 37
Hall, e.T., 97
Hampden-Turner, C., 98
Handbook of Coaching Psychology, The 

(Palmer and Whybrow), 16
happiness, 24, 25, 59, 96, 111
Hardiman, R., 72, 73
healthcare systems

Malta leadership coaching programme 
(case study), 181–6

management challenges, 175–6
national Health Service (nHS), 83, 131, 

176–81, 208–16
Hofstede, G.H., 97, 98
Holland, S., 15, 220
human strengths, 25–7
Humphrey, S., 220

ice-skating and ice-hockey story 
(Peterborough case study), 193

iCF see international Coaching Federation
iconic representation, 40
idealized leadership attributes (iLAs), 181, 

183–4
identification/acting Gestalt techniques, 

127–8
iLA see idealized leadership attributes
iLS see universal integrated framework 

(UiF)/integrative learning system (iLS)
impact evaluation, 85, 208, 209–10,  

225–6

industry
codes and ethics, 229–35
overview, 9–14
standards, 227–9

insightful learning, 29
inspirational distortions, 79
integration

Gestalt techniques, 128, 150
knowledge transfer matrix, 71

intercultural coaching, 60
see also cross-cultural practice

interdisciplinary overlap, 3, 4, 16–19, 22, 59
international Coaching Federation (iCF), 

xiv, 10, 56
international Society for Coaching 

Psychology (iSCP), 12–13
internet

communities of practice, 86, 87
e-coaching/mentoring, 14, 19–21, 154, 

186–9, 216
electronic mentoring matching, 222
self-review online tools, 104, 209
UiF, 91, 118 see also cultural and social 

competence self-assessment 
questionnaire

interpretivism, 28
‘invitation, The’ (oriah Mountain dreamer) 

(poem), 236
ireland, S., 145
iSCP see international Society for Coaching 

Psychology
i/you exercises (Gestalt-based coaching), 

159–60

Johari window, 113, 113, 136
Johnson, G., 67
journey metaphor, xiv, 15, 21, 33, 55
Jung, C., 201
justification, 134, 138, 139

Kai Sin, xiv
Kandola, P., 24
Kirkpatrick, d., 207
kite mark scheme, 227
knowledge transfer, 67, 69–74, 87–8, 214

see also learning theories
Kodak, 64–5
Kolb, d.A., 33, 34, 35, 73
Kowalski, B., 76



258 Index

landscape mapping, 28, 135–9, 164, 194
Lane, d., 17, 18, 19, 92, 227
Lave, J., 44, 86
law of effect, 29
leadership

in changing business environment, 64–5, 
66, 175–6

in a coaching culture/learning 
organization, 77, 81, 88–9, 184

competence/performance, 74–6, 89, 180, 
181, 183–4

executive coaching, 10, 15, 57, 89, 131, 
132, 150, 154

Malta leadership coaching programme 
(case study), 181–6

as mentors/coaches, 14, 132
top team diversity, 73, 74
transatlantic e-coaching project (case 

study), 186–9
UiF/iLS framework, 102, 108, 111, 114
UK coaching and mentoring programme 

(case study), 176–81, 208–16
learning organizations

benefits of coaching/mentoring, 6, 13, 
15, 68, 75–6, 213–16

changing business environment, 6, 64–6, 
85, 91

coaching programmes, 75–82, 88–9,  
101–2, 133 see also case studies

communities of practice, 86–7
equation with competence/performance, 

66–9, 101–2
knowledge types, 69–70, 87
leadership styles/competencies, 74–6, 88
psychology of learning/knowledge flow, 

70–4
social/community application, 82–7

learning theories
coaching/mentoring frameworks, 14, 15, 

21 see also universal integrated 
framework (UiF)/integrative learning 
system (iLS)

constructive-developmental theories, 
37–44

learning context, 27–8
learning process, 3, 33–7, 51, 58–9, 70–4
literature review, 28–33
positive psychology, 9, 16, 21, 22, 23–7, 

50, 59

social learning, 44–6
Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development, 

40–1, 42, 61, 134, 135
Leonard, n.H., 76
Levinson, d.J., 38, 39
life coaches/coaching, 13, 14, 57, 132
life stages, 38–40, 145, 149
life structure theory, 38–40
line-dancing story (Peterborough case 

study), 192
living in the moment practice, 124, 159, 161
locus of control model of learning, 32–3, 35

Maltese leadership coaching programme 
(case study), 181–6

market overview, 9–14
marriage brokering, 221
matching coaches/coachees, 79, 80, 177, 

178, 198, 219–23, 235
Mayer, J.d., 102
MBTi see Myers-Briggs Types indicators
McKenna, d., 16–17
meaning

dynamic learning model, 49, 50
ebbinghaus’ principle of association, 29
individual meaning making, 42–4
positive psychology, 23, 24, 25, 26
social interaction, 42, 44–6
through narrative, 44, 135
through reflective practice, 34, 36, 37
using metaphors, 148

meaningful reception learning theory, 43
meditation, 100, 122
men’s life structure, 38–9
mentoring/coaching

industry/market see industry
skills/competence, 21, 88–9, 156, 201, 

212, 214
terminology, 3, 4–5, 7, 53–8, 101

meta-models, 92, 112, 119
see also universal integrated Framework 

(UiF)/integrative learning system (iLS)
mindfulness, 100, 123, 134, 159
minority group success, 31–2
monitoring (RoAMeF evaluation 

framework), 207
motivation, 30–1, 105, 105–6, 214, 215–16

see also self-efficacy
multiculturalism, 22



 Index 259

Myerhoff, B., 45, 134, 139, 189
Myers-Briggs Types indicators (MBTi),  

76, 221

narrative coaching
coaching attitude/posture, 141–2
complexity debate, 18
group situations, 140–1
landscape mapping, 28, 135–9, 164, 194
narrative psychodrama, 169–73
Peterborough case study, 189–96
remembering conversations, 139–40
storytelling exercises, 164–9
theoretical foundation, 41–2
Vygotsky’s levels of learning, 134–5

narrative psychodrama, physical exercises, 
169–73

national Health Service (nHS), 83, 131, 
176–81, 208–16

naturalistic knowledge engineering (nKe), 72
nature–nurture debate, 32
negative learning experiences (exercise), 156
niche/speciality coaching, 57
nKe see naturalistic knowledge engineering
nurture–nature debate, 32

objectives
case studies, 177, 181, 186–7, 190,  

197, 208
coach–coachee matching, 220
codes of practice, 229–30
CPd cycle, 94
evaluation, 203, 204, 205–6, 207, 208, 

209–10
learning organizations, 66, 67, 77, 78, 79, 

80, 105
motivational, 31, 105
SMARTeR, 78, 79, 131, 132, 133, 144
UiF competencies, 105, 108

objectivism, 28
‘off-piste coaching’, 145–9
options (GRoW model revisited), 144
organizations/employers

360-degree feedback, 114
analysis tools, 66
coaching benefits, 6, 13, 15, 68, 75–6, 

213–16
coaching/mentoring market, 9–10, 13–14
communications technology, 19–21

corporate coaching defined, 57
goals in matching matrix, 220
importance of leadership, 65–6
internal coaching/mentoring, 14
see also learning organizations

outsider witness retelling, 140, 141, 164, 
167–8

Padesky, C.A., 130
Palmer, S., 12, 16, 59, 130
paradoxical theory of change, 124–6
paratheatre, 169
parenting, 16, 37
peer review, 113–14
people knowledge, 69, 70, 87
Perls, F., 122, 128
personal competence

case studies, 179, 185, 186, 212, 213, 
214, 215, 217

CPd, 226
creativity, 107, 111, 145, 149, 171
definition of personal strength, 59
pragmatic model, 103, 111
self-assessment questions, 104–7, 111
self-efficacy, 30–1, 35, 41, 102–3
self-esteem/confidence, 31, 83, 105,  

133–4, 155, 200, 214, 215
structuring reflective logs, 155–6
techniques/tools, 120–1, 147, 150 see also 

cognitive behavioural techniques; 
Gestalt therapy/coaching

UiF/development intention model, 113
Peterborough, narrative coaching in 

communities (case study), 190–6
Peterson, C., 24, 25, 27
Peterson, d., 16
Petrides, K.V., 102, 110, 111, 112
Piaget, J., 37–8
positive psychology, 9, 16, 21, 22, 23–7, 

50, 59
practical exercises

CBT, 157–8
Gestalt coaching, 158–64
narrative psychodrama, 169–73
storytelling exercises, 164–9

pragmatism, 28
prejudice, 47–8
principle of association, 29
prisons, 83



260 Index

procedural knowledge (recipe/directory 
knowledge), 69, 70

process evaluation, 208, 209
professional competence

case studies, 180, 186, 214–15
leaders, 74–6, 89, 180, 181, 183–4
learning organizations, 66–9, 101–2
narrative coaching, notes for coaches, 

164–5, 166–7
pragmatic model, 103, 111
self-assessment questions, 112–13
structuring reflective logs, 156

professional cultures, 100
professionalism (coaching/mentoring)

coaching psychology debates, 19
ethics, 13, 229–35
standards, 227–9

professional organizations, xiii, 10–13
Association for Coaching (AC), 57,  

186–9, 227
British Psychological Society (BPS), 

Special Group in Coaching Psychology 
(SGCP), 2, 11–12, 58, 60, 92, 212, 
227, 229

Chartered institute of Personnel and 
development (CiPd), 11, 55

Chartered Management institute (CMi), 
11, 13, 75

european Mentoring and Coaching 
Council (eMCC), definitions of 
coaching/mentoring, 54, 55, 56–7, 227

international Coaching Federation (iCF), 
10, 56

prophecy, 145, 149
proximal development, Vygotsky’s zones of, 

40–1, 42, 61, 134, 135
psychology

coming of age, 16–19
definitions, 59–60
transpersonal, 16, 122, 169
see also learning theories

psychometric tests, 76
psychotherapy, 2, 16–17, 24, 51, 122, 134, 230
public-sector coaching programmes, 15 see 

also national Health Service

quality
ethics, 229–35
standardization, 13, 227–9

rationale, objectives, appraisal, monitoring, 
evaluation and feedback framework 
(RoAMeF), 204–10

rationale (RoAMeF evaluation framework), 
204–5

Ratner, G., 84
realism, 105
realistic goals, 78, 132, 143, 144
reality, 5, 28, 143, 144

see also meaning
re-authoring (narrative coaching), 136,  

137–9, 164–5
receptiveness to coaching, 153, 156–7
recipe knowledge, 69, 70
reflective practice

case studies, 178, 183, 199–200
coaching/mentoring framework, 46–7, 

48, 49, 50, 111
CPd cycle, 92, 93, 94
decision-making behaviour, 76
diaries/logs, 36, 130, 155, 157–8
learning theories, 33, 34, 35–7, 42–4, 47, 48
logs/accounts, 36, 130, 155, 157–8
organizational learning, 71, 72, 73
role of coaching, 18
Vygotsky’s levels of learning, 41, 134

remembering conversations, 139–40, 164, 
165–7

reputation, 84, 87
resilience, 75, 105, 126, 185, 193
resistance to change, 125–6
respect, 110
Rice University e-coaching (case study), 186–9
RoAMeF see rationale, objectives, appraisal, 

monitoring, evaluation and feedback 
framework

Rosinski, P., 60, 98, 99, 146

Salovey, P., 102
schema theory, 43–4
Scholes, K., 67
Scholl, R.W., 76
schools, 83–4
self-confidence, 31, 83, 105, 133–4, 155, 

200, 214, 215
self-development

defining coaching/mentoring, 53–4, 
55–7, 59–60

see also personal competence



 Index 261

self-efficacy, 30–1, 35, 41, 102–3
self-fulfilling prophecy, 31
Seligman, M., 23, 24, 25, 27
skills/competence in coaching/mentoring, 

21, 88–9, 156, 201, 212, 214
SMARTeR objectives, 78, 79, 131, 132, 

133, 144
social artists/diversity champions, 51, 77, 

109, 110, 111, 180
social competence

case studies, 179, 185, 212, 213, 217
mentoring link, 54
pragmatic model, 103, 111
self-assessment questions, 107–9, 111
structuring reflective logs, 156
tools/techniques, 145, 147, 148, 149, 150
UiF/development intention model, 113

social learning
communities of practice, 42, 44, 45, 46, 

86–7, 154
Community Coaching Café (case study), 

196–200
families, 96–7, 100, 147
knowledge transfer, 71
locus of control model of learning, 32–3, 35
narrative-based, 42, 140–1, 167–9, 189–96
in organizations, 64–6, 82, 84–6
reinforcement affect model, 29–30
support, 83–4

speciality/niche coaching, 57
Spinelli, e., 69
spirituality, 25, 26, 122, 149, 169, 224
sports coaching, 16, 34, 55
Stacey, R.d., 17–18, 84
standardization, 13, 227–9
storytelling approach see narrative coaching
strategic management, 66–7, 77–8
styles of coaching, 14, 57–8, 97, 98, 130
supervision, 92–5, 153, 154, 162, 197, 

225–6
suppressive Gestalt techniques, 126, 150
symbolic representation, 40
systems thinking, 17–18

tacit knowledge, 68, 71, 72, 87, 88
targets see goal setting; objectives
techniques/tools, 17

adapting the GRoW model, 143–5
‘coaching off-piste’, 145–9

reflective logs, 36, 130, 155, 157–8
see also cognitive behavioural techniques; 

Gestalt therapy/coaching; narrative 
coaching

technology see internet
temporary states, 145, 147–8
terminology, 3, 4–5, 7, 53–60, 101
three-chair exercise, 163–4
tools see techniques/tools
top dog–underdog dichotomy, 128–9, 

163–4
transatlantic e-coaching project (case study), 

186–9
translation/explication Gestalt 

techniques, 127
transpersonal psychology, 16, 122, 169
Trompenaars, F., 98
trust

ethical coaching, 235
online relationships, 20
self-assessment questions, 105, 106, 

107, 111

UiF see universal integrated framework 
(UiF)/integrative learning system (iLS)

universal integrated framework (UiF)/
integrative learning system (iLS), 91

basis for matching matrix, 220, 221
CPd/supervision, 92–5, 154–5, 225–6, 

228, 235
cultural/cross-cultural appreciation, 

95–103, 224
dimensions/development areas, 60–1, 

104–13
encouraging creativity, 145, 228
evaluation, 93–4, 155, 199, 209, 210–13, 

217, 223, 225–6
feedback mechanism, 93, 113–14
integrative continuum, 101–2
in practice see case studies
role flexibility, 101, 210
standardization/creativity, 228
structuring a reflective log, 155–6
tools/techniques, 119, 145–51
to structure training, 153–4, 155, 

173, 185
UiF revisited, 115–17
UiF updated, 5, 17, 118
see also dynamic learning model



262 Index

van nieuwerburgh, C., 56
Vroom, V., 32
Vygotsky, L.S. see zone of proximal 

development

web meetings, 19, 21
Wenger, e., 44–6, 77, 86
Western cultural values, 33, 39–40, 100, 

102, 115
White, M., 42, 134, 135, 137, 140, 142
Whitmore, J., 16, 143
Whybrow, A., 16, 17, 130

will (GRoW model revisited), 144–5
women’s life structure, 39

Yorkshire-pudding story (Peterborough case 
study), 192–3

you/i exercises (Gestalt-based coaching), 
159–60

you-ness (Gestalt exercise), 160
young people, 83–4, 196

zone of proximal development (Vygotsky), 
40–1, 42, 61, 134, 135


	The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
	Copyright
	Contents
	About the Author
	Foreword to the First Edition
	Preface to the Second Edition
	Acknowledgements
	1 Introduction
	Aims
	Whom Is It For?
	How This Book Differs from Others
	Working terminology
	Towards the integration of terms

	Content in a Nutshell
	Book Research Approach
	Why Coaching, Mentoring and Learning?
	How to read this book

	2 The Coming of Age: Coaching Psychology, Coaching and Mentoring
	Introduction
	The Coaching Psychology, Coaching, Mentoring and Training Market
	Academic and professional institutions
	Professional organizations for coaching psychology, coaching and mentoring
	Business and management consultancies

	Coaching
	Mentoring
	Coaching Psychology
	Coaching models
	Professionalism
	Evidence-based practice

	e-Coaching and Mentoring
	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	3 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching and Mentoring: Positive Psychology and the Learning Process
	Introduction
	Positive Psychology
	Linking Learning to Coaching and Mentoring
	Coaching and mentoring as a learning process

	The Psychology of Learning
	Learning Theories Revisited
	The learning process
	Reflective learning
	Constructive–developmental theories
	Social learning theories

	Applying Psychology of Learning to Develop a Coaching and Mentoring Framework
	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	4 Definitions: Coaching Psychology, Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
	Introduction
	The Meaning of Mentoring
	Are there differences between coaching and mentoring?

	Definition of Coaching
	Definition of Learning
	Applying the definition of learning to instructing, coaching and mentoring

	Definition of Coaching Psychology
	Definition of Intercultural Coaching Psychology
	Proposal for a Universal Integrative Framework for Coaching Psychology
	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	5 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring: Becoming a Learning Organization and Learning Community
	Introduction
	Challenges of the Changing World
	Enron: unethical corporate leadership culture
	Kodak: hard to shift culture
	Learning from case studies
	Getting started

	A Learning Organization Is a Competent Organization
	Coaching Psychology and Organization Memories
	Learning Organization and Psychology of Learning
	Role of top team

	Managerial and Leadership Competencies
	Leadership and Organization Development through Coaching
	Developing a Coaching Culture
	Introducing a Coaching Programme within an Organization
	Embedding the coaching and mentoring culture within an organization

	Widening the Context
	Social support for coaching and mentoring
	The need for collaborative and partnership approaches to learning
	The need for learning communities

	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	6 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework for Coaching and Mentoring
	Introduction
	Universal Integrated Framework ( UIF): Building on the Integrated Universal Elements of Diverse Mentoring Coaching
	Learning Cycle, Supervision and Continuous Professional Development ( CPD)
	Appreciation of Cultural Environment
	The significance of culture

	Coach/Mentor/Mentee Fluidity
	Integrative Continuum
	Cross-Cultural Emotional Intelligence
	Integrating Cross-Cultural Coaching and Mentoring Intelligence into the Universal Framework
	Dimension I: Personal competence
	Dimension II: Social competence
	Dimension III: Cultural competence
	Dimension IV: Professional competence

	Feedback Mechanism: Peer Rating 360-Degree Feedback
	UIF Revisited
	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	7 Techniques and Tools
	Introduction
	Tools for Developing the System of the Self
	Tools for developing your self-awareness and for managing your emotion: gestalt approaches
	The transpersonal aspect of gestalt approach
	The primacy of present-centred attitudes
	The paradoxical theory of change
	Gestalt techniques
	Managing yourself, your cognition and emotion: cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)

	Techniques that Are Sensitive to the Self and the Others’ Culture: Narrative Approaches
	The landscape of action
	The landscape of consciousness
	Remembering conversations
	Outsider witness retelling
	Definitional ceremony (community): retellings of retellings
	The narrative coach’s attitude and posture

	Putting It All Together: Developing Your Own Authentic Coaching Process
	The GROW model revisited
	Coaching off-piste

	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	8 Continuing Professional Development, Learning Resources and Practical Exercises
	Introduction
	ILS Training and Continuous Professional Development
	Writing and Keeping a Reflective Log
	Exercises in Learning
	Identifying sources of negative learning
	Identifying psychological factors
	Identifying intervention

	Practising Cognitive Behavioural Coaching
	Cognitive behavioural diary: writing it down

	Gestalt Exercises
	Level 1: I/You exercises
	Level 2: Awareness of the continuum
	Level 3: Top dog/underdog

	Storytelling Exercises
	The re-authoring conversation
	The remembering conversation

	Narrative Psychodrama: Physical Exercises
	The flow
	Acting out

	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	9 Case Studies
	Introduction
	Case Study 1: Leadership Coaching and Mentoring Programme in the Healthcare Setting: UK
	Aims and objectives
	The process
	Reflection

	Case Study 2: Leadership Coaching Programme in the Healthcare Setting: Malta
	Aims and objectives
	The process
	Learning

	Case Study 3: E-Coaching: A Transatlantic Coaching Pilot Project
	Aims and objectives
	The Process

	Case Study 4: Narrative Coaching in Communities
	Aims and objectives: the vision
	The process: the definitional ceremony
	Evaluation: Follow-Up Feedback
	Outcome

	Case Study 5: Coaching in Communities: Community Coaching Café
	Aims and objectives
	The process
	Evaluation
	Reflection

	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	10 Evaluation
	Introduction
	Evaluation Methodology
	Step 1: rationale
	Step 2: objectives
	Step 3a: appraisal
	Step 3b: Implementation
	Step 4: Monitoring
	Step 5: Evaluation

	Evaluation of the Universal Integrated Framework
	Results

	Benefits of Coaching and Mentoring to Organizations
	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	11 Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development
	Introduction
	Matching between Coaches and Coachees
	Matching for success
	The role of electronic mentoring matching
	What to look for in a coordinator

	Emotional Intelligence and Cross-Cultural Competence
	Evidence-Based Research: Coaching Assessment and Impact Evaluation
	Supervision and coaching training

	Coaching and Mentoring Standards
	Ethics and Code of Conduct
	Ethics as a Cross-Cultural Phenomenon
	Future Work and Research
	Chapter Summary and Reflection

	References
	Index



























































































Law_The Psychology of Coaching_v3.indd

