4 definitions
Coaching Psychology, Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
Introduction
in Chapter 1 you have learnt about a generic working description of coaching and mentoring, as a developmental process of support offered to an individual, which results in action. i hope that this has been enough to get you started in your explora- tion. Against the background of our discoveries so far, the present chapter provides a critical review of the definitions of coaching psychology, coaching, mentoring and learning, which come from different traditions. A succinct definition of a universal approach to the psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning will be given at the end.
The word ‘mentor’ comes from a character in Greek mythology portrayed in Homer’s Odyssey: Mentor. Mentor was actually Athena, the goddess of wisdom, in disguise, entrusted to educate Telemachus, the son of odysseus. in China, one would regard Confucius (孔子) as the first mentor (see Figure 4.1).
The Meaning of Mentoring
The traditional image of a mentor perpetrated the misconception that mentors are usually more mature and experienced people, who pass on their knowledge and skills to help their protégés up the corporate ladder. This notion fixes the roles into a learner–teacher hierarchy and counters our value of equality and the idea that the process is mentee-driven.
More recent historical literature reviews (e.g. Louis Antonine de Caracciolo’s Le véritable mentor ou L’éducation de la noblesse, or the work of Levinson, darrow, Klein, Levinson and McKee, 1978, mentioned in Chapter 3) seem to suggest that mentoring is closely related to the process of development (Garvey, 2011) in three main respects:
The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 
54 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
 Figure 4.1 Athena and Confucius: the first mentors? Source: Athena: Stephane Mallarmé, Les dieux antiques, nouvelle mythologie illustrée (Paris, 1880). Confucius: © sinopics / istockphoto
•  psychological (cognitive and emotional): for example, through self-awareness and emotional intelligence;
•  social: for example, through social development – both one’s own and that of the other (Sheehy, 1976, 1996; Levinson et al., 1978);
•  professional: for example, through career development (Clutterbuck, 2004).
Daloz (1999) spoke about ‘mentors as trusted guides, who understand theory of personal development and have experience in translating it into practice’. The European Mentoring and Coaching Council (EMCC) defines mentoring ‘as a developmental process which may involve a transfer of skill or knowledge from a more experienced to a less experienced person through learning dialogue and role modelling, and may also be a learning partnership between peers’ (EMCC, 2011: 4). In consequence, by comparison with coaching, mentoring seems more concerned with a longer term personal/career development. Many of the single- strand mentoring definitions derive from corporate settings, and phrases such as ‘overseeing’ or ‘outside the line of management’ do not make them appropriate for the different context of mentoring. One may simply define mentoring as a social interaction between at least two people, in which the knowledge, experience and skills of one (or of both) are shared through a process that leads to psycho-social or professional development – in the form of personal growth, self-awareness and understanding (insight). This definition resonates with the recent practice of the East Mentoring Forum in the UK.

Definitions 55 Are there differences between coaching and mentoring?
Following these traditions, some practitioners (e.g. Parsloe, 1995) draw clear boundaries between coaching and mentoring. Viewed from this tradition, mentoring can be defined as a personal, development-centred approach, primarily embracing career issues – whereas personal development and coaching are more performance-centred. Mentoring becomes a long-term relationship, which continues through job changes, while co- coaching (in which coaches coach each other) may be of a relatively short term and linked to a project or performance issue. in practice, coaching may take place in the line relationship in specific areas, but co-coaching is always outside the line and a man- ager experienced in some aspect of improvement is undertaking the supervision.
Some practitioners and organizations do not draw a distinction between coaching and mentoring. For example, the Chartered institute of Personnel and development (CiPd) describes both coaching and mentoring as ‘helping behaviours’ that are used ‘to support personal development over shorter and longer periods respectively’ (CiPd, 2012).
The eMCC regards both coaching and mentoring as ‘activities within the area of professional and personal development with focus on individuals and teams and relying on the client’s own resources to help them to see and test alternative ways for improvement of competence, decision making and enhancement of quality of life’. it considers both the coach and the mentor as ‘an expert in establishing a relationship with people in a series of conversations with the purpose of serving the clients to improve their performance or enhance their personal development or both, choosing their own goals and ways of doing it’ (eMCC, 2011: 3).
Pauline Willis (2005) suggests that coaching and mentoring are similar activities and processes. Coaches and mentors often share the same skills and practices. in this book i advocate the overlapping and interchanging nature of a coaching–mentoring continuum, not only because it is grounded in a common psychology of learning, but also, and more importantly, because it is more fluid, flexible and adaptable to an indi- vidual’s changing needs over time across contexts and cultures.
Definition of Coaching
The term ‘coach’ has a double meaning in english. As a person, a coach is usually understood to be an instructor or a trainer in sport. This is one of the reasons why coaching psychology has its earlier roots in sport psychology. However, coach also literally means ‘carriage’ – a vehicle to transport people from A to B. in the past, a coach used to be a horse-drawn carriage (see Figure 4.2). nowadays we have the image of a modern vehicle, which takes us on a journey from where we are now to where we wish to be (destination). This play on words (the double meaning of ‘coach’) was first used in William Thackeray’s Pendennis in 1849 – as Garvey (2011: 12) observes in the course of drawing a history of coaching.
This actually resonates with the metaphor i use for coaching – which is that of a journey. Thus the role of a ‘coach’ is to act as a vehicle that carries (transports) the coachees from where they are (here and now) to where they aspire to be (in the future). The historical perception mentioned earlier, which has defined mentoring,

56 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
 Figure 4.2 A Coach?
also helped shape the early definitions of coaching. Coaching has been defined by a number of scholars and practitioners as the art of facilitating the performance, learning and development of another (Downey, 1999); one is directly concerned with the improvement of the coachees’ performance and the development of their skills. This may be carried out in the form of a conversation, tutoring or instruction (Parsloe, 1995).
The above resonates with the classic definition mostly spoken about by coaches, coined from Timothy Gallwey in John Whitmore’s (2002: 8) Coaching for Performance: ‘Coaching is unlocking a person’s potential to maximize their own performance. It is helping them to learn rather than teaching them.’
My colleague Dr Christian van Nieuwerburgh (2012: 17, cited in Coaching in Education Study Guide) defines coaching thus:
A one-to-one conversation focused on the enhancement of learning and development through increasing self-awareness and a sense of personal responsibility where the coach facilitates the self-directed learning of the coachee through questioning, active listening, and appropriate challenge in a supportive and encouraging climate.
To summarize, coaching activities have the following characteristics (Law, 2002):
•  They unlock people’s potential to maximize their own performance.
•  They help people to learn rather than teaching them (they have a facilitation
function).
•  From an instructional point of view, they are directly concerned with the immediate
improvement of performance and the development of skills through a form of
tutoring or instruction.
•  They enhance performance in the domains of work and personal life, and this
is underpinned by models of coaching grounded in established psychological approaches.
Each professional coaching body has its own definition, too. According to the International Coach Federation (ICF), coaching is a ‘partnering with clients in a thought-provoking and creative process that inspires them to maximize their personal and professional potential’ (ICF, 2013). Similarly, the EMCC describes coaching as a ‘partnering with clients in a thought-provoking and creative process that inspires them to maximize their personal and professional potential’ (EMCC, 2011: 5) and claims that this is a process ‘facilitating the client’s learning process by using

Definitions 57
professional methods and techniques to help the client to improve what is obstructive and nurture what is effective, in order to reach the client’s goals’ (p. 3).
The Association for Coaching (AC) provides a comprehensive range of definitions for coaching in terms of the following domains (AC, 2012):
•  Personal/Life: ‘A collaborative, solution-focused, results-orientated and systematic process in which the coach facilitates the enhancement of work performance, life experience, self-directed learning and personal growth of the coachee’ (citing the definition by Anthony Grant in Australia).
•  executive: ‘personal coaching [...] is specifically focused at senior management level, where there is an expectation for the coach to feel as comfortable exploring business related topics, as personal development topics with the client in order to improve their personal performance.’
•  Corporate/Business: ‘the specific remit of a corporate coach is to focus on support- ing an employee, either as an individual, as part of a team and/or organization to achieve [sic] improved business performance and operational effectiveness.’
•  Speciality/niche: ‘the coach is expert in addressing one particular aspect of a person’s life e.g. stress, career, or the coach is focused on enhancing a particular section of the population e.g. doctors, youths.’
•  Group: ‘the coach is working with a number of individuals either to achieve a common goal within the group, or create an environment where individuals can co-coach each other.’
As mentioned in Chapter 2, there are diverse styles of coaching and mentoring, rang- ing from the direct instructional approach to non-directive, facilitative techniques. There is no agreement on which is the best approach. it usually depends on the individual client, coach or mentor, and the contextual situation the stakeholders bring into the space of engagement. However, there is a common agreement among coaches and mentors that they work with their clients to help them to discover and maximize their strengths for their own benefit and/or that of their organizations. Typical state- ments from coaches and mentors include:
[...] the intention of helping people to achieve a breakthrough in their lives and then helping them beyond that breakthrough. (Breakthrough and Beyond Ltd., participant in the workshop)
[... to help] people to communicate better, to help them understand other people’s perceptions, and indeed their own too, and to become much more effective in everything that they do. The ultimate aim is to enable organizations to be more efficient, to increase their retention of good staff and to be profitable. However the programmes are also about personal development, so that participants can take away learning and experiences that will help them in their private, as well as their working lives ... it seeks to make learning fun to enable individuals to take learning back to their work and lives [...] develop a person’s capacity to learn and grow in such a way that they continue learning long after a course ends. (Learning to inspire Ltd., participant in the workshop)
The above observations represent a diverse spectrum of approaches, ranging from facilitation at one end to instructional approaches at the other. According to the

58 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning Instruction
   Facilitation
Figure 4.3 Facilitation versus instructional approaches in coaching
Special Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP) survey, the facilitation style is the preferred approach, being favoured by more than 70 per cent (see Figure 4.3). in a universal approach, there should be in-built sustainability and renewal. Potentially, everyone can be a coach to support others who are engaging in the process.
Definition of Learning
in this book it is argued that coaching and mentoring should be anchored in the psy- chology of learning; and the book adopts Marcy driscoll’s definition, as she has suc- cessfully brought together different strands of psychology and used them for practice by reflecting on her accumulated knowledge and years of experience in teaching undergraduates and new graduates in education.
According to driscoll, learning is a persisting ‘change in performance or performance potential that results from experience and interaction within the world’ (2005: 9; emphasis added). According to this definition, learners take the input from their experience and produce a permanent change in their performance. While the defini- tion also implies that the focus should not always be on short-term, readily measured performance improvements, performance does matter and needs to be a point of focus in any development process, at least for some of the time.
A key question is: what are the exact factors that cause the permanent change? From Chapter 3, you have learnt that this is a complex process and involves many factors. Learning theories aim to unpack some of those factors. They usually look at the concept of learning through four areas (Figure 4.4):
1 input: what (and who) is needed for the process of learning to occur? Answer: some action (doing some social activities); a facilitator; the presence of barriers (where the facilitator needs to design a set of bridging tasks to help the learner to overcome them); and a code of ethics (learning contract).
2 Means: how does it occur? Answer: in the form of a conversation; in space (which is a social learning space); by developing a community (social system) and a learning culture; through governance and practice.

Definitions 59
    Input
Means
Output
Outcome
   Figure 4.4 defining a learning process
3 output: what are activities generated from the learning process? Answer: the performance of the learnt task.
4 outcome: what changes take place? Answer: the co-creation of meaning; a sense of purpose and self-identity (sense of belonging).
Applying the definition of learning to instructing, coaching and mentoring
Applying the psychology of learning to the definition of instruction, Marcy driscoll connects learning theories to instruction for trainers (which has a similar implication for teachers, coaches and mentors). She defines instruction as ‘any deliberate arrange- ment of events to facilitate a learner’s acquisition of some goal’ (2005: 23; emphasis added).
Definition of personal strength: contribution from positive psychology
According to Linley and Harrington (2005: 13), positive psychology is ‘[t]he scientific study of optimal functioning, focusing on aspects of the human condition that lead to happiness, fulfilment, and flourishing’; they also lead to strength, construed as ‘[a] natural capacity for behaving, thinking, or feeling in a way that allows optimal func- tioning and performance in the pursuit of valued outcomes’.
From these two definitions, coaches and mentors can expect that understanding more about psychology will help coachees and mentees achieve their optimal func- tioning and performance in the pursuit of valued outcomes. Let’s see how this com- pares with the definition of coaching psychology.
Definition of Coaching Psychology
Coaching psychology aims to enhance well-being and performance in the domains of personal life and work with normal, non-clinical populations, and it is underpinned by models of coaching grounded in established adult learning or psychological approaches (Grant and Palmer, 2002: 8; emphasis added).
note that the above definition emphasizes the application of psychology to coach- ing for normal, non-clinical populations only. it brackets out the potential population of clients who may benefit from coaching. Moreover, the line to draw between clinical and non-clinical within the continuum of a normally distributed population is both arbitrary and difficult. it is also probable that clients who seek a coaching intervention may suffer from psychological problems such as stress, trauma and depression. it is argued that coaches have a duty of care in their practices if their clients enter the consultation with clinical problems (Spence, Cavanagh, and Grant, 2006).
While Grant and Palmer’s definition was initially adopted by the Coaching Psychology Forum in May 2002, the above issues were discussed in a number of

60 The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
meetings as the Forum evolved into the established Special Group in Coaching Psychology. it was decided that the phrase ‘normal, non-clinical’ be deleted from the definition, in order to make it more inclusive. Thus coaching psychology is defined as being ‘for enhancing well-being and performance in personal life and work domains underpinned by models of coaching grounded in established adult learning or psychological approaches’ (Palmer and Whybrow, 2006: 8).
More recently, in 2006, the SGCP definition has removed the term ‘adult’, as coaching psychology can also be applicable to children’s learning (e.g. to parenting). Thus coaching psychology is for enhancing well-being and performance in personal life and work domains, being underpinned by models of coaching grounded in established psychological approaches.
Definition of Intercultural Coaching Psychology
As mentioned in the introduction, valuing diversity and applying coaching across cul- tures are essential criteria in successful coaching in the modern global communities – be it in international business or in a multicultural society. We thus pay particular attention to redefining coaching psychology in a way that is applicable across cultures.
intercultural coaching psychology enhances the well-being and the performance of individuals from different cultural backgrounds or with dual cultural heritage in their personal life and work. Cross-cultural coaching is subtly different from intercultural coaching. it is a form of coaching individuals who come from different countries, and hence have different cultures. We advocate in this chapter that it would be useful for the psychological approaches that underpin both forms of coaching to be based on cultural anthropology. However, the traditional emphasis on culture as relating primarily to geographical and ethnic variation is not sufficient in a universal model that operates in an increasingly complex, mixed and hybrid world. nowadays work meets home life, people meet each other, workers with a different ethos work together, partnership between new types of organization and inter-community collaboration in new ways are key to our sustainability. The notion of culture and context need to be fluid enough to encompass the changing micro- and macro-worlds we construct and move between every day.
While our definition is very similar to that adopted by the SGCP within the main- stream, it is more in line with Philippe Rosinski’s (2003) proposal that, by integrating a cultural dimension into coaching, we can help our coachees access more of their potential to achieve meaningful outcomes.
Proposal for a Universal Integrative Framework for Coaching Psychology
From the many definitions put forward by many scholars in the field and from our understanding of the psychological theories of learning, a universal integrative frame- work (UiF) was proposed in the first edition. The framework is ‘underpinned by psychological learning theory in a process that is developmental, brings about change

Definitions 61
and is culturally mindful. it enables flexibility and fluidity in its practice, to extend beyond boundaries’ (Law, ireland and Hussain, 2007: 55).
To this i should add that the ‘change’ should be relatively permanent and sustain- able across the following developmental areas:
•  personal: self-awareness and mindfulness;
•  social: awareness of social interaction; managing communication, feedback and
relationships;
•  cultural: appreciation of a cultural environment;
•  professional: including learning, supervision and continuous professional
development (CPd).
The above four domains will be expanded further in Chapter 6.
Chapter Summary and Reflection
This chapter has provided a list of concrete definitions of the key concepts. The theoret- ical grounding of coaching, mentoring and learning, and their scientific credentials, have been emphasized. However, readers should be mindful not to subscribe to any specific, narrow approach at the expense of the art of coaching, which is not over-formalized and therefore offers wide possibilities for learning. As a result, a universal integrative frame- work (UiF) has been proposed – a process that takes people beyond organizational, community and self-imposed boundaries into a new domain. it embodies the spirit of coaching – that is, through coaching, people are moved (transported) out of their com- fort zone (their familiar knowledge and known experience) into a new territory of learning (Vygotsky called this the zone of proximal development). Such exposure would increase understanding of the multiple dynamics of any situation and of a complex world. Let’s explore this further as our journey unfolds.